--- Page 1 ---
 1 A CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION APPROACH  
 TO TONAL HARMONIC ANALYSIS  
TIM HOFFMAN  
WILLIAM P. BIRMINGHAM  
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENT  
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN  
25 JANUARY 2000  
TECHNICAL REPORT   
CSE -TR-397-99 
 

--- Page 2 ---
 2 Abstract  
This paper gives an  algorithm for harmonic analysis for a tonal composition using a constraint -satisfaction 
problem (CSP) model. The algorithm combines rule -based and preference -based approaches to perform 
harmonic analysis, taking the position that the problem can be modele d as a computational process and less of a 
psychological phenomenon. Using cadential patterns within the piece, it identifies tonal centers and assigns the 
harmonic analysis, applying preferences when necessary. A software implementation of the algorithm i s 
presented, along with a discussion if its results.  
1 INTRODUCTION  
Harmonic analysis provides a theoretical framework for examining a musical composition and summarizing its 
tonal organization. This analysis is based upon the rules of tonal harmony, whose a pplication results in a 
grammatical parsing (Roman numeral notation) of a composition; this Roman numeral analysis gives the 
functions of chords relative to the key area, or tonal center, in which the chords reside. Designed to analyze 
Western tonal music (seventeenth to nineteenth century), it provides insight into the musical language spoken 
by the great composers of this era.  
In recent years, there have been several attempts, with various levels of success, to render portions of harmonic 
analysis as algo rithms. By and large, these research efforts have been informal, relying on lists of rules or 
sketches of algorithms. They have not addressed some of the important computational issues, such as problem 
complexity, algorithm complexity, and generally have n ot provided concise descriptions of their algorithms. By 
addressing these issues, we gain insight into how harmonic analysis can be tackled efficiently by computers. 
Further, we believe that the precision necessary for computational analysis will provide m usical insight as well. 
Lerdahl and Jackendoff’s efforts in creating a formal system for tonal music analysis, for example, have lead to 
important musical insights (Lerdahl and Jackendoff 1983) . Likewise, we focus our efforts on tonal musi c 
analysis, examining chorales written by Samuel Scheidt, a seventeenth -century composer. Scheidt’s music 
closely follows the conventions of tonal harmony, making it excellent test material for our algorithm.  
In this paper, we model harmonic analysis as a constraint -satisfaction problem (CSP). The CSP’s formal 
framework provides a clear representation of the problem, facilitates its analysis, and encourages concise 
algorithm descriptions. We chose to model the problem using attributed domains to take advant age of the 
properties of chords, such as key, quality, and function. We borrow this technique from the more expansive 
Multi -Attribute Domain (MAD) CSP (Darr 1997; Darr 1998) . 
In addition to its expositional advantages, the CSP naturally ha ndles constraint and preference processing. We 
posit, and demonstrate in this paper, that many rules used in harmonic analysis are actually analytical 
constraints. By modeling these “rules” as constraints, we can both simplify processing by reducing, albei t not 
necessarily eliminating, the number of ad hoc  rules, and by bringing to bear powerful algorithms from the CSP 
literature on harmonic analysis.  
Central to our approach is the identification of tonal centers in the composition. This cannot be accomplis hed by 
a simple application of a rule, as the rules for tonal harmony are not specifically stated, but are conventions 
drawn from centuries of musical experience. There is no music -theoretic requirement, for example, that a tonal 
composition must employ th e tonic -dominant relationship, yet it is ubiquitous and recognized by musically 
trained and untrained listeners alike. Likewise, the algorithms presented here use cadences as a basis for 
identifying tonal centers. Using the constraint that modulations (cha nges in the tonal center) are suggested by 
cadences, our algorithm searches a piece for all cadential structures, determines which are locally the best, and 
then decides whether or not to modulate. After finding the tonal centers, it labels the chords in t he piece with the 
proper Roman numeral notation.  
The lack of a formal system in tonal harmonic analysis poses a problem for a computational approach. Like 
natural -language parsing, tonal harmonic analysis does not necessarily give a single answer; two musi c theorists 
analyzing the same composition may arrive at different analyses, yet neither of them would necessarily be 
considered more correct. Many of the decisions made during analysis reflect the analyst’s preferences. Thus, 
preferences must be included in the computational system. An example of a preference is the selection of the 

--- Page 3 ---
 3 location of a modulation; there may be several equally valid places for the modulation, with fixing of any one 
relying on the analyst’s preference.  
We describe in this paper th e CSP representation, how the types of music we are interested in analyzing map to 
a CSP, and the algorithms we use to perform harmonic analysis.  
2 REPRESENTATION  
Understanding the algorithm presented in this paper requires a basic knowledge of CSPs. A brief  introduction to 
CSPs follows.  
2.1 CSP overview  
2.1.1  Definition  
A CSP comprises the following elements:  
•  a set of variables  V = {V1, …, V i, …, V n}.  
• a domain  for each variable,  Di= {d1, …, d d}, which is the set of values that may be assigned to variable 
Vi. The dom ains in this paper are discrete, but in general may be either discrete or continuous. 
Extending d i definition to include an attribute ; di.att is in the set {key, quality, function}. This is in 
the spirit of the more expansive MAD -CSP definition.  For examp le, an instantiation of a variable 
might be V i = <C, Maj, I>.  This tuple, consisting of three attributes, constitutes one domain 
element . 
• a set of constraints , C = {C 1,1,1 , …, C i,j,k }, which place restrictions on the possible values of the 
variables. In this paper, we are concerned only with binary constraints (although the MAD -CSP 
requires no such restriction). The notation C i,j.k refers to a constraint that has variables V i and V j as 
arguments, with k denoting a particular constraint between these varia bles. In this paper, the 
constraints are directed, although this is not a requirement.  
The modulation constraints ( Table 1) are binary. The complete notation identifying an arbitrary 
constraint should be C i,j,k, representing the node, constraints involving that node, and whether it is 
"inbound" (coming from V i-1)or "outbound" (going to V i+1). For notational convenience, we treat 
them as directional. This gives each V i (except the first and last, V 1 and V n) three constraints 
associ ating V i with V i+1.To simplify this notation further, we refer to only the outbound constraints 
from V i. In referring to constraint C i,j, we refer to all constraints connecting V i to V i+1. Thus C 2,5 is 
the constraint that specifies V 3.key = V2.key + 7. We use this notation without loss of generality, as 
all the modulation constraints can still be uniquely identified.  
• Constraint -propagation functions h i,j(di.att) restrict the attributes comprising the domain  of V i, 
given the possible assignment of domain val ues to all other arguments.  
• The precondition -evaluation function, c i,jpre, defines when constraint C i,j is active. If c i,jpre is TRUE, 
Ci,j is active (it restricts D i and D i+1); otherwise, it is inactive (all domain values trivially satisfy the 
constraint) . 
• Constraint -evaluation functions, C i,j(Vi, Vi+1), return TRUE if the arguments satisfy constraint C i,j, 
and FALSE otherwise.  
• A constraint graph, G(V,C), which depicts the relationships among the variables and constraints. The 
nodes are variables, and the arcs are the constraints. Further, we assume that constraints are directed 
arcs from V i to V j, without loss of generality. In fact, as we show in this paper, G(V,C) is a hypergraph 
that is tree shaped.  

--- Page 4 ---
 4 2.1.2  Properties  
A solution to a CSP is an assignment of val ues to all the variables that simultaneously satisfies all the 
constraints. A solution may require a possibly combinatorial search of the domain space to find such an 
assignment. A benefit of using the CSP framework is that there are many heuristics for re ducing the complexity 
of the search process.  
An important method for improving the efficiency of the search, arc-consistency  checking, ensures that for each 
variable, all the domain elements satisfy the constraints on that variable. This eliminates infeasi ble domain 
elements, thereby reducing the search -space size. Arc consistency is given by Equation 1. 
""Vi: { ""di ÎÎ Di : Ci,j(Vi, Vi+i) }           
Equation 1 
Arc consistency does not guarantee that all co nstraints can be satisfied simultaneously: it does not guarantee 
that a solution exists.  
Decomposability, the strongest form of arc consistency, (also known as n -consistency) does guarantee a 
solution. If graph G is decomposable, then all assignments of t he variables constitute solutions; the domains 
contain no values that will cause any constraint to be inconsistent. In a decomposable graph, all variable 
assignments constitute solutions.  
Searching a graph may also involve preferences , which guide the sear ch towards more preferable solutions. An 
example of a preference in harmonic analysis is choosing an applied function over a root function, such as 
choosing V/V instead of II for a chord’s function.  
2.1.3  Example  
Figure 1 shows a constr aint graph for a simple CSP. In this example, there are only two types of constraints: 
Ci,11 specifies that V i+1.width = V i.width + 1, and C i,2 specifies that V i+1.height = V i.height.  The domains of 
each variable are listed in tables.  For example, V 1 has a domain comprising the tuples <1,7> and <5,9>.  
 
width height
1 7
5 9
V1
V2
V3width height
2 4
3 3
6 7
width height
9 3
4 7
2 10
C1,1
C2,2
 
Figure 1.  Initial constraint graph.  
 
                                                                 1To simplify the discussion, we assign a number to each constraint “type.” For example, the height 
constraint type is always constraint 2 in the example. In general, this is not necessary, and the constraint number 
(the second argues of its subscript) coul d change.  

--- Page 5 ---
 5 C1,1 specifies that V 2.width = V 1.width + 1, and C 2,2 specifies that V 3.height = V 2.height. Using arc consistency 
checking, we first check constraint C 1,1, and find that <3,3> can be eliminated from D 2. Assigning V 2.width = 3 
violates C 1,1 because 2 is not present in the “width” column in D 1, so <3,3> is removed. Similarly, by checking 
C2,2, we eliminate from D 3 the tu ples <9,3> (because <3,3> is no longer in D 2) and <2,10>. After making the 
graph arc consistent, we are left with the diagram in Figure 2. 
V1
V2
V3C1,1
C2,2width height
1 7
5 9
width height
2 4
6 7
width height
4 7
 
 
Figure 2.  Arc consistent constraint graph.  
The solution to this CSP is V 1 = <5,9>, V 2 = <6,7>, V 3 = <4,7>, found by instantiating variables in reverse  
order. Starting with V 3, <4,7> is the only choice. Satisfying C 2,2 forces V 2 to <6,7>, and satisfying C 1,1 forces V 1 
to <5,9>. Note that the graph in Figure 2 is arc consistent but not decomposable.  
2.1.4  Musical example  
Suppose a sequence of three chords is analyzed. Our CSP representation has each chord a variable, whose 
attributes are the key and quality of the tonal area , and function , which is the harmonic function (Roman 
numeral notation). The constraints listed in Table 1 apply. Figure 3 depicts the three chords, along with its CSP 
representation.  

--- Page 6 ---
 6 V1V2V3C2,4C1,2
V1V2V3
D1
<0,Maj,I>
<1,Maj,VII>
...
<11,Maj,nat
II>C1,4C3,1
Music CSPD2
<0,Maj,V>
<1,Maj,#IV>
...
<11,Maj,nat
VI>D3
<0,Maj,I>
<1,Maj,VII>
...
<11,Maj,nat
II>
 
Figure 3. Music and CSP representation.  
The root of V 1 is C, and by enforcing C 3,1, D1 reduces to one element. C 1,4 similarly eliminates all but one 
element from D 2. (Note that pitches are assigned numbers; half steps are o ne increment apart.).  The solution to 
the example in Figure 3 is the tuples <0,Maj, I>, <0,Maj, V>, <0,Maj, I>, which is a perfect authentic cadence.  
2.2 CSP Musical Representation  
In this section, we show the mapping from harmonic ana lysis (at least, the part of which we are concerned) to a 
CSP.  
2.2.1  Assumptions  
The assumptions regard the harmonic restrictions placed on the pieces we currently can analyze:  
• The key of the piece is that of the root of the first and last chords, and the quali ty of the key (major or 
minor) is that of the first chord.  
This reduces the burden of key finding in this project. This was done for two reasons: key finding is not a trivial 
task, with a good  deal of literature devoted to this subject alone (Vos and Geenen 1996; Temperley 1997) . More 
important, the area of interest of this algorithm is the identification of key changes within a piece. The onus of 
detecting modulations and key areas still rests on the algorithm, and is described in detail l ater. 
• All modulations are to major keys.  
This does not affect the generality of the algorithm; it simply narrowed the scope of the project. Including minor 
keys means having to include special cases for the different types of minor scales (melodic and harm onic). If 
the process can be done for major, then minor can be done in the same manner; the tables for what tones are 
diatonic to a given key would  simply be different.  
• Modulations follow the circle of fifths.  
For example, if the current key were D Major,  it can either modulate to the dominant, A Major, or to the 
subdominant ( IV), G Major. In tonal music, the circle of fifths is not a rule, but rather a strong preference, as 
the tonic -dominant relationship is considered one of the strongest in tonal music (Lerdahl 1988) . 

--- Page 7 ---
 7 • Suspensions (a dissonance that resolves to consonance) are resolved in the input.  
Some may question the validity of eliminating suspensions (in the same manner that some object to how 
Schenkerian analysis removes “unnecessa ry” notes for its analysis), but the goal of the project is to determine 
different key areas of the piece. Suspensions add color and direction to the piece, but do not change the 
harmonic analysis.  
• Neighboring and passing tones are omitted.  
The justificati on for this assumption is similar to the former, as passing and harmonic tones will not change the 
harmonic analysis of a piece. Occasionally, a neighboring tone's motion will take it through a seventh, in which 
case the no te is harmonically important; in these cases, the note is included.  
2.3.2  Mapping  
Our mapping of a composition to a CSP is in Table 1. Note that root is not included as an attribute of a chord. 
This is represented by the function attribute; knowing the function means k nowing the root as well. In some 
constraints, we refer to the root of a chord; this is for notational convenience.  
 
CSP  Music  
Variable  Chord  
Domain attributes  Key 
Quality (major, minor)  
Function (Roman numeral notation)  
Cadence (Boolean)  
Index (integer)  
Root  
Inversion  
Chord (array of integers that comprise the chord)  
Constraint -propagation functions  1. V1.key = V n.root  
2. Vn.key = V 1.key 
3. Vi.quality = major  
4. Vi+1.key = V i.key 
5. Vi+1.key = (V i.key + 7)MOD(12)  
6. Vi+1.key = (V i.key +5) MOD(12)  
Constraint precondition -evaluation functions  
(Section 3.1.4)  1. True  
2. True  
3. True  
4. Vi+1.key = V i.key 
5. Vi+1.key = (V i.key + 7) MOD(12)  
6. Vi+1.key = (V i.key + 5) MOD(12)  
Search preferences  • If |Di| > 1 and V i+1.root = V i+1.root+7 and V i.key = 
Vi+1.key, prefer V i.function = V/V to V i.function  
= II 
• If |Di| > 1 and V i+1.root = V i+1.root+1 and V i.key = 
Vi+1.key, prefer V i.function = vii °/V to 
Vi.function = #iv ° 
Table 1.  Musical CSP representation.  
The attributed domains are in the spirit of a Multi -Attribute Domain (MAD)  CSP, but since the domains are 
treated as discrete collections of attributes, they are modeled as a traditional CSP. Of the attributes, the first 
three ( key, quality, function ) are directly related to music, whereas the last two ( cadence, index) are 
particular to our algorithm.  

--- Page 8 ---
 8 The first three constraints (see “Constraint -propagation functions” in Table 1) establish the key of the piece. 
Under our assumptions, the piece begins and ends in the same key; these constraints determine the key of the 
first and last chords. With this information, the algorithm determines the tonal centers for the entire piece.  
The last three constraints, or modulation constraints , contradict themselves, saying that at any time a piece 
simultaneously stays  in the same key, modulates to the dominant, and modulates to the subdominant. This is 
because there are no restrictions on where modulations can occur. So, in the constraint graph, all the modulation 
constraints must apply to each  node, V i. Each modulatio n constraint’s precondition ensures that only one 
modulation constraint will be active per variable.  
Since the first three constraints are always active, they need no precondition -evaluation function.  (Such a 
function would simply return TRUE.) The last t hree constraints, however, require precondition -evaluation 
functions to ensure that only one modulation constraint is active per each node. The purpose of the 
precondition -evaluation functions is to determine where modulations occur.  
Search preferences ens ure a unique solution. After arc consistency is enforced, the graphs become 
decomposable; however, some domains have more than one element, allowing more than one possible solution. 
The search preferences select the best value for the variable rather than enumerate all the possible solutions.  
2.2.2  Conversion  
The conversion of a musical score to the input for the algorithm is done by hand, similar to Winograd’s method 
(Winograd 1968) . The resulting list is a series of four -voice chords (listed as  Bass, Tenor, Alto, Soprano), with 
the numbers referring to the MIDI pitch values. (For example, pitch = 60 is C 4, or middle C.) A value of –1 in a 
voice means it is silent in that chord. The following example shows the conversion of the chorale Von Himmel  
Hoch (a) , using the assumptions given in Section 2.2.1. 

--- Page 9 ---
 9 
 
Figure 4: Original score, Von Himmel Hoch (1) . 
 
Figure 5: Chords , Von Himmel Hoch (1) . 
 
   B  T  A  S   B  T  A  S   B  T  A  S   B  T  A  S   B  T  A  S   B  T  A  S  
1) 48 55 64 72  
2) 52 55 -1 71 
3) 53 60 65 69  
4) 55 -1 62 71 
5) 48 60 64 67  
6) 53 57 60 69  
7) 50 53 62 69  8) 55 55 62 71  
9) 43 55 65 71  
10) 48 55 64 72  
11) 48 55 64 72  
12) 52 55 67 72  
13) 48 55 64 72  
14) 47 55 62 67  15) 48 55 64 67  
16) 43 59 62 67  
17) 45 57 60 64  
18) 52 55 59 67  
19) 40 60 64 67  
20) 41 57 62 65  
21) 43 59 62 65  22) 48 55 60 64  
23) 48 55 60 64  
24) 41 53 60 69  
25) 45 60 65 69  
26) 48 60 64 67  
27) 47 55 67 71  
28) 45 55 64 72  29) 50 54 -1 69 
30) 43 55 59 67  
31) 45 52 64 72  
32) 50 55 62 71  
33) 50 54 62 69  
34) 55 55 62 67  
35) 48 60 64 67  36) 52 60 67 67  
37) 53 57 60 69  
38) 46 58 62 65  
39) 48 55 60 64  
40) 43 53 59 62  
41) 48 52 60 60  
 
Figure 6: Chord list.  
Note that this representation disregards metrical information. This does not mean that such information is 
unimportant to harmonic analysis. Our aim is to identify tonal centers, and there is strong evidence that vertical 
sonorit y (chords) can provide the necessary information to do this (Cook 1987; Lerdahl 1988) . 

--- Page 10 ---
 10 3 ALGORITHM  
Central to the algorithm is the identification of tonal centers. The algorithm first finds the root and sets the 
domain for each chord. Based on the assumptions in Section 2.3.1, it determines the key of the piece. Next, it 
searches the chords for cadential patterns, creating a cadence list. This list is used to find modulations.  
Cadences are central to our algorithm, as they form the basis for  identifying tonal centers. In our notation, a 
“cadence in C” means that the root of the cadence’s last chord is C. This is also the chord used to identify the 
cadence , allowing us to represent cadences as a subset of the set of chords. This subset is know n as the cadence 
space, Z, where Z ⊂ V: it comprises a distinguished set of variables, such that each Z j ∈ Z is the last chord of 
the cadence. Further, for simplicity, we number each Z j sequentially. Note, however, that a set of chords (V i) of 
arbitrary nu mber can   exist between Z j and Z j+1. The " cadence" domain attribute indicates if the chord is a 
member of the cadence space. The  " index" domain attribute is simply the number assigned to the chord as it 
read from the input file.  
Figure 7shows the relationship between chord space and cadence space.  
 
 
Cadence space :  Z = {z1 ... zm}
Chord space :  V = {v 1 ... vn}
 
Figure 7. Cadence space vs. Chord space  
It is important to note that a cadence chord (shaded) differs from a non -cadence chord only by the value of a 
Boolean attribute, denoted by the "Cadence" attribute in Table 1. Cadence chords simply have this flag set to 
TRUE. The reason for creating two separate chord spaces is that some of our algori thms search the chord space, 
while others search the cadence space. Throughout this paper, "Z k" refers to a chord in cadence space, whereas 
"Vi" refers to a chord in chord space.  
Using the cadences as signposts for tonal centers, the algorithm determines w here modulations occur. With the 
tonal centers’ locations defined, the preconditions for the constraints given in Table 1 come into effect. For each 
chord within a given tonal center, the active constraint is the one that specifie s no modulation. (Constraint C 4 in 
Table 1.) At a modulation, the dominant or subdominant modulation constraint (C 5 or C 6) is active. The domain 
of each chord is searched for the elements that satisfy the constraints of key and qu ality.  
After applying arc consistency, a search finds the solution, which is the harmonic analysis. Most of the domains 
reduce to a single element, but when an applied chord is possible, there will be two elements. In this case, the 
search preferences dete rmine which element is the better choice.  
The overall algorithm is given in Figure 8. In all of our pseudo -code listings, V and Z are represented by the 
variables Chord_List  and Cadence_List , respectively.  

--- Page 11 ---
 11 Figure 8. Overall algorithm.  
The overall algorithm is not a complete description; some sections summarize subroutines that would be 
unwieldy to list here. These subroutines are capitalized, as in FIND_ROOT(V i) (Line 3.) We explain these 
subroutines in de tail in the following discussion. Section 3.1 explains the logic for the process, and Section 3.2 
analyzes its complexity. Note that the heading for each sub -routine gives the corresponding lines in the overall 
algorithm where that subroutine occurs.  
3.1 Operation  
3.1.1  FIND_ROOT(V i): line 3 of overall algorithm  
The method for finding roots is similar to Hindemith’s method (Hindemith 1970) . The algorithm triadifies  a 
chord, taking its voicing, which may span many octaves,  and lowers the octaves of the tenor, alto, and soprano 
voices so that all are within an octave of the bass. For example, the chord G 4-C5-E6-C7 (an widely spaced chord) 
would become G 4-C5-E5-C5. Since the C 5 in the soprano is now redundant, it is not added  to the ‘triadified’ 
chord, thus leaving G 4-C5-E5. The chord is now assumed to be in root position (‘zeroth’ inversion), and the 
voices are compared individually to the bass to determine the chord’s true inversion. This is done by finding the 
interval betw een the bass and the voice being compared, and then applying rules, based on that interval, that 
determine whether the voice should remain where it is or be lowered by an octave. This octave lowering means 
that the bass note is no longer the root of the ch ord, and thus is of some inversion. The algorithm is given in 
Figure 9. 1.  Create Chord_List from input file  
2.  for i ← 1 to |V| 
3.    FIND_ROOT(V i) 
4.    CREATE_DOMAIN(V i) 
5.  Cadence_List ← ∅ 
6.  append V 1 to Cadence_List  
7.  for i ← 1 to |V| 
8.    if IS_CADENCE(V i) 
9.      for j ← 1 to |D i| 
10.       νi,j.cadence = TRUE  
11.       append V i to Cadence_List  
12. mod_index ← 0 
13.  for k ←1 to |Z|-1 
14.   mod_index ← MODULATE(Z k,Zk+1) 
15.   EVALUATE_PRECONDITIONS(Z k,Zk+1, mod_index)  
16. for i ← 1 to |V| 
17.   for j ← 4 to 6 
18.     if C i,jpre = TRUE 
19.       for d ← 1 to |D i| 
20.         if νi,d.key violates C i,j 
21.           remove νi,d from Di 
22. for i ← 1 to |V| 
23.   if |D i| > 1 
24.     print preferred νi 
25.   else  
26.     print νi 

--- Page 12 ---
 12  
Figure 9. FIND_ROOT(V i) algorithm.  
Given G 4-C5-E5, the algorithm first checks the interval between the first and second notes, G 4-C5. Since this 
interval is a perfect fourth (corresponding to interval  = 5 in the root -finding algorithm), inversion  is set to two 
(since inversion  is currently zero) by line 11, and C 5 is dropped an octave to a C 4 (line 12). Next, the interval 
between the first and third notes, G 4 and E 5, is found to be a sixth (corresponding to interval  = 9); since 
inversion  = 2 , line 7 does not apply, but the note is still dropped an octave (line 8). The resulting triad is now 
C4-E4-G4. The chord is C major chord in seco nd inversion.  
3.1.2  CREATE_DOMAIN(V i): line 4 of overall algorithm  
After triadifying a chord, a table is filled with the chord’s possible functions in the different key signatures. For 
example, the C -major triad’s functions from the example in Section 3.1.1are given in Table 2: 
Table 2. Domain -attribute values for a C Major chord.  
Similar tables are created for chords that are minor and diminished. (Note that all the columns to the ri ght of 
“function ” have the same value.  These are properties of the chord itself and do not change, regardless of the 
analysis.) Initially, all the cadence fields are set to FALSE. The index field is set by a counter that increments 
as each chord is read f rom the input file. It is important to store this value, so that we can access a particular Z i 
from the Cadence Space. (i.e., to determine the corresponding V i.) Applied chords make it possible to have 
domain elements with the same key and quality, but dif ferent functions, as functions depend on the situation in 
which they are found. For example, a II chord may also be a V/V; thus, both possibilities are represented in the 
domains of every major chord.  1.  Vi.inversion ← 0 
2.    for j ← 1 to 3 
3.      interval = V i.chord[j] – Vi.chord[0]  
4.      if (interval = 8) OR (interval = 9)  
5.        if V i.inversion < 1  
6.          V i.inversion ← 1 
7.        lower V i.chord[j] by an octave  
8.      else if (interval = 5) OR (interval = 6)  
9.        if V i.inversion < 2  
10.         Vi.inversion ← 2 
11.       lower V i.chord[j] by an octave  
12.     else  
13.       if interval = 2  
14.         V i.inversion ← 3 
15.       lower V i.chord[j] by an octave  
Chord  Domain Attributes  
Vi Key Quality Function  Cadence Index Root Inversion  Chord 
νi,1 C Maj I FALSE i 0 2 [60 64 67]  
ν i,2 C#/Db Maj nat. VII  FALSE i 0 2 [60 64 67]  
ν i,3 D Maj nat. VII  FALSE i 0 2 [60 64 67]  
… … … … … … … … … 
ν i,12  B Maj nat. II FALSE i 0 2 [60 64 67]  
 

--- Page 13 ---
 13 Some properties of chords, such as inversion, are repre sented as attributes even though their values are constant 
throughout the domain. E 4-G4-C5 is a C Major triad in first inversion, regardless of the tonal center in which it is 
found. (Note that the triad itself has a key and quality, which are not to be co nfused with the key and quality of 
a tonal center to which the chord belongs.) The key area to which the chord belongs determines a chord's 
harmonic function.  
3.1.3  IS_CADENCE(V i): line 8 of overall algorithm  
Creating the cadence list requires identifying every  cadential structure in the piece. The cadence -finding 
algorithm searches for three types  of cadences: I -V-I, II-V-I, and IV -V-I. Plagal and half cadences (I -IV-I and 
V-I, respectively) are not included because they are weaker indicators  of tonal change.  
Figure 10. IS_CADENCE(V i) algorithm.  
The elaboration  variable (lines 1, 4, and 9) allows for elaboration of the dominant in the cadences. For 
example, this means that I-V-V7-I, as well as I-V-I, are both perfect authentic cadences. Setting 
elaboration ← 2 (line 1) is a value, determined experimentally, that identifies elaborated dominants in 
cadences, but does not include lengthy patterns. For example, if elaboration ← 4, then the sequence I-V-V-
V-V-I would be a cadence, but harmonic ally it is unlikely that this is the case. Line 3 checks the previous 
chord in the list for a possible V-I relationship. After allowing for elaboration of the dominant (lines 4 -8), it 
checks the preceding chord in the list; if the root of this chord is a II, IV, or V in relation to the original chord 
(Vi), then the cadence is appended to Z. Z is stored as an ordered list; this is required for the algorithm to 
function properly. Since the list of chords is from which Z is created is ordered, Z does not requi re sorting.  
The resulting list Z of cadence chords, Z ⊂ V, gives the possibilities for the tonal centers’ locations within the 
piece, with a modulation possible between any two adjacent cadences in different keys. The relationship 
between the number of ca dences and n, the number of chords, is not unique; there are no hard and fast rules 
about where cadences occur, with the exception of the end of a piece.  
When the cadence -identification algorithm finishes, the list contains many ‘false’ cadences, whose roo t motions 
fit the cadence pattern matching, but are not true cadences in their harmonic function. The following example 
shows all the cadences found in a chorale by Samuel Scheidt ( Von Himmel Hoch (2). ) 1.  elaboration ← 2 
2.  j ← Vi.index – 1 
3.  if ((V j.root+7)MOD(12) = V i.root) AND (j > 0)  
4.    while elaboration > 0   
5.      if V j-1.root = V j.root 
6.        j ← j-1 
7.      else  
8.        break  
9.      elaboration ← elaboration - 1 
10. if { V j-1.root = V i.root OR  
11.     (V j-1.root+5)MOD(12) = V i.root OR  
12.     (Vj.root+2)MOD(12) = V i.root  }  
13.   return TRUE  
14. else  
15.   return FALSE  
  

--- Page 14 ---
 14 
1) II-V-I in F2) IV-V-I in G3) II-V-I in C
4) I-V-I in C
5) II-V-I in G 6) I-V-I in C7) II-V-I in C
 
Figure 11. Cadence identification.  
False cadences are accepted or rejected based on the circle of fifths (e.g., a cadence in D cannot follow a 
cadence in C), or by a heuristic that decides how well the cadence fits the key it suggests. For example, a G -
major cadence whose chords contain no leading tones (F#) is considered much weaker than one that does 
contain leading tones.  
In the case of overlapping cadences, this heuristic decides which is the false cadence. The criteria for 
elimination is the number of  non-harmonic tones (NHTs), relative to the keys of the cadences, are present in the 
chords; the cadence whose key has the most NHTs is eliminated.  Figure 12 shows an example of a D major 
cadence overlapping a G major cadence.  
 Figure 12. Overlapping cadences.  
The G major cadence is chosen in this case, because the F# in the tenor voice of its second chord is a leading 
tone for G major. In the case of the D major cadence , its second chord has a C natural i n the soprano voice, 
which is not a leading tone to D major. Since the preparation of the D major chord is weaker than the 
   Cadence in D Major
    IV         V            I
    ii             V          I
   Cadence in G Major

--- Page 15 ---
 15 preparation of the G major chord, the latter cadence is chosen as the correct one, and the former is discarded. A 
situation in which overlapping cadences are not resolved is when both cadences are in the same key and share 
only one chord. Thus, a II -V-I and a I -V-I may overlap (i.e., II -V-{I}-V-I) if the roots of the I chords are the 
same. In this case, both cadences are added to the ca dence space.  
Another criterion for cadence elimination is lack of proper voice leading. Cadences are strengthened 
harmonically by contrary motion between the soprano and bass and by stepwise motion in the soprano voice 
(Aldwell and Schacht er 1978) . We define the latter only between the last two chords of a cadence. In  Figure 
12, the cadence in D major does not have stepwise motion in the soprano voice in its last two chords. Cadences 
that lack both contrary motio n and stepwise soprano motion are removed, as it is unlikely that they function as 
cadences in the piece.  
Figure 13 shows the cadences that remain in Von Himmel Hoch (2) after eliminating false cadences.  
 
3) II-V-I in C
5) II-V-I in G 6) I-V-I in C7) II-V-I in C
 
Figure 13. Final cadence list.  
Cadence 1 (see Figure 11) is eliminated because of the B natural in the soprano voice, which is not diatonic to 
the key of F. Cadence 2 is removed by the same rule. Cadenc e 4 overlaps Cadence 5, and is eliminated by 
comparing the NHTs of the two keys.  Thus, the cadences in Figure 13 comprise the cadence space.  
Note that the first chord of the piece  is automatically the first chord in the cadence l ist. This serves as the 
starting point for identifying modulations, which we discuss later.  The cadence list from Figure 13 would be 
{C,C,G,C,C}.  (These are the roots of the chords that comprise the Cadence Space.)  
3.1.4  MODULATE(Z k,Zk+1): line 14 of overall algorithm  
Between sequential cadences Z k and Z k+1, a modulation is possible if their key attributes are different. To 
determine if a modulation occurs, the algorithm builds a table of the sums of all the harmonic tones, relative t o 
all twelve major keys, of all the chords between consecutive cadences. (This is an O(|V|) operation.) To 
determine if the section between Z k and Z k+1 modulates,  the MODULATE  algorithm compares the table values 
for the corresponding section for Z k.key and Zk+1.key. If the number of harmonic tonesfor Z k.key is higher than 
that for Z k+1.key, then no modulation occurs; the tonal center of the entire section is Z k.key. 
The harmonic -tone table uses a weighting to represent accurately the tonality of a section.  Since a leading tone 
to the dominant (which is really a non -harmonic tone relative to the tonic) can still suggest the tonic itself, it is 
considered a partial  harmonic tone. The weighting used in our algorithm is that a harmonic tone (relative to the 
tonic) has a weight of 5, whereas a leading tone to the dominant gets a weight of 1. The result is that the 

--- Page 16 ---
 16 presence of an occasional leading tone to the dominant in a passage does not necessarily suggest that the tonal 
center of that passage is the dominant;  it may still be the tonic. For example, consider the following notes: 
C,D,E,F,F#,G.  In C major, all the notes are harmonic tones except for the F#, which is a leading tone to the 
dominant , G major. Thus, the value for this passage in the harmonic tone t able would be 26.  (Five harmonic 
tones, one leading tone to the dominant.) In G major, the harmonic tone value for this passage would be 25; 
there are five harmonic tones (each with a weight of 5), and one non -harmonic tone, (F), which has a weight of 
zero. This passage is therefore more likely to be in C major than in G major.  
If, however, the section has more harmonic tones when Z k+1.key is the tonal center, then at some chord between 
Zk and Z k+1, the section modulates from Z k.key to Z k+1.key. A linear s earch of the chords between Z k and Z k+1 
finds the chord where the modulation occurs. If the modulation is to the dominant (Z k+1.key = Zk.key + 7) , 
then the search order through V i is from Z k to Z k+1. If the modulation is to the subdominant (Z k+1.key = Zk.key - 
7), then a reverse search (Z k+1 to Z k) is used. In both cases, the search looks for the first chord that contains a 
leading tone to Z k+1.key. Having found this chord, the search proceeds forward (regardless of its initial 
direction) for the first ton ic (I) chord to Z k+1.key. This is the chord where the modulation occurs. In the case of a 
“down” modulation (V -I), it searches for the pivot chord , which will have both V/I and I/V functions in the two 
keys.  
This procedure is the MODULATE  algorithm. Its ar guments are Z k and Z k+1, and it returns the chord number 
(Vi.index) where the modulation occurs. If Z k+1.key = Zk.key, then no modulation exists between the cadences, 
and MODULATE  returns zero. A special case of MODULATE  occurs when checking the last two c adences in the 
list. Since the piece must return to its home key (which was determined by the first three constraints in Table 1), 
it will always return a modulation in this case. It ignores the harmonic tone table lookup and perf orms the 
search previously described. For example, if the keys of the last two cadences are {E,A}, then it must modulate 
to A.  
In Figure 13, modulations are possible between Cadence 3 and Cadence 5 (C -G), and between Cadence 5 and  
Cadence 6 (G -C). MODULATE  identifies the following modulations:  
 
Modulation
from C to GModulation
from G to C
 
Figure 14. Modulations.  
In finding the modulation from G to C (dominant to tonic), it finds the first chord with a leading tone to G by a  
reverse  search, and then proceeds forward to find the first chord that serves as both a V/I in G and I/V in C. 
This is the pivot chord, and the modulation occurs at the following chord.  

--- Page 17 ---
 17 3.1.5  EVALUATE_PRECONDITIONS(Z k,Zk+1, mod_index) : line 15 of overall algori thm 
Table 1 lists six constraints. The first three determine the key of the piece: the first and second examine the first 
and last chord to get the key, and the third constraint enforces the assumption that all keys are major. Enf orcing 
these constraints is simple, both conceptually and computationally. Applying arc consistency using these 
constraints affects only the first and last chords of the piece. For example, if a chorale in G major were the 
input, arc consistency using the first three constraints would result in everything being eliminated from D 1 and 
Dn except those domain elements whose key attribute is “ 7” (the key of G) and quality attribute is “Maj.” 
Since there is no additional information about the tonal centers of th e piece, the domains of all other variables 
are unchanged.  
 
 
Figure 15. EVALUATE_PRECONDITIONS(Z k,Zk+1, mod_index)  algorithm.  
The remaining three constraints establish tonal centers. Whereas these constraints specify attributes fro m only 
two chords in its argument list, their preconditions are more complex. To determine which of these constraints 
is active, the preconditions are evaluated to find the modulations. ( MODULATE  is defined in Section 3.1.4.) The 
precondition evaluation al gorithm is given in Figure 15. 
If the keys of the two cadences are the same, then there is no modulation between them. In this case, lines 2 -5 
set C i,1pre to TRUE and the other preconditions to FALSE for all C i,j, where Z k+1.index ≥ i ≥ Zk.index. If the 
keys of Z k and Z k+1 are different, then a modulation is possible between these cadence chords. If MODLUATE  
finds a modulation, then lines 6 -25 evaluate the preconditions such that up to the modulation, the tonal center is 
that of Z k (lines 14 -17); after the modulation, the tonal center is that of Z k+1(lines 22 -25). Lines 14 -21 set the 
preconditions for the modulation chord. If it modulates to the dominant, lines 14 -17 apply. For modulations to 
the subdominant, lines 18 -21 apply.  
In some cases, the precondition -evaluation algorithm removes a cadence from Z (lines 8, 27). If MODULATE  
decides against a modulation between Z k and Z k+1, then Z k+1 is removed, as it is no longer an indicator of tonal 
change (line 8). The next comparison would  be between Z k and Z k+2. If Z k+2 violates the circle of fifths 
constraint, it is also removed (line 27).  
For example, suppose the following five cadences comprise the list: (C,G,D,G,C). Modulations are possible 
between each successive cadence pair. Suppos e Modulate examines the first and second cadences and finds no 
modulation, then the second cadence (in G) is removed from further consideration, leaving the list (C,D,G,C). 
Now the first and second cadences (C,D) violate the circle -of-fifths -modulation con straint, so again the second 
cadence is removed, leaving (C,G,C).  
Due to the strong tonic -dominant relationship in the pieces analyzed, this section of the algorithm also considers 
adjacent cadences in the dominant key to be an indication of a modulation, so the first of the two dominant 
cadences is a “Sforced” modulation. Thus, in a cadence sequence such as (C,G,G,C), the presence of two 
consecutive cadences in the dominant key (G) is considered to be a strong enough indication that a modulation 
occurs bet ween the first two cadences in the list.  
The result of the precondition -evaluation algorithm is the activation of the constraints that establish the tonal 
centers. The arc -consistency algorithm (lines 16 -21 in the overall algorithm) performs a forward trav ersal of the 
chord space, removing infeasible domain elements from each chord. Due to the tree structure of the constraint 
graph, we do not need to recheck a domain after enforcing a constraint. Since the constraints are all binary and 
directed, it is impo ssible for constraint C i,j to affect the domain of any variable other than V i+1.  
In Figure 14, the algorithm starts at the first chord (V 1) and makes C i,4pre TRUE until it reaches the first 
modulation (C to G, measure 7). For the  chord prior to the modulation, it evaluates C i,5pre to TRUE, activating 
the constraint for modulating up a fifth. Between the first and second modulations, it again evaluates all C i,4pre to 
TRUE for all constraints on the chords between the modulations. U pon reaching the second modulation (G to C, 
measure 9), it evaluates C i,6pre to TRUE, activating the constraint that specifies modulating down a fifth. Finally, 
it finishes the remaining segment of chords (from the second modulation to the end of the piece ) by once more 

--- Page 18 ---
 18 evaluating all C i,4pre to TRUE. This entire operation occurs in chord space.  The resulting tonal centers are shown 
in Figure 16. 
 
C Maj
G Maj C Maj
 
Figure 16. Tonal centers.  
3.1.6  Solut ion 
When applying arc consistency, most of the domains reduce to one element. (Recall that our definition of a 
domain element is a tuple of < key, quality, function >.) This makes sense, as knowing the tonal centers 
usually defines the harmonic functions of chords. In the case of applied or cadential chords, a domain will have 
more than one element, and the search preferences in Table 1 are used to choose the best analysis. Note that the 
graph is now decomposable; none of the domain elements remaining after G( V,C) is arc consistent will violate 
any constraint. The best answer is inferred by the (search) preferences, which are merely table lookups. The 
solution search, therefore, is linear in | V|, the number of chords in the piece. We prove this in the following 
section.  
3.2 Analysis  
In this section, we analyze the algorithms given in Section 3.1. By taking advantage of the CSP framework and 
properties of tonal music, we were able to represent harmonic analysis as a sequence of O(| V|) opera tions, as we 
will demonstrate in the following sections.  
3.2.1  Constraint graph  
The modulation constraints in Table 1 (the last three constraints) create a directed acyclic graph (DAG), shown 
in Figure 17. C1 and C 2 are not shown, as they limit the domains of V 1 and V n but nothing else; the algorithms 
operate under the assumption that C 1 and C 2 have already been applied. C 3 is not included in the graph, because 
the domains are created without any  elements that violate it.  

--- Page 19 ---
 19 etc ... V1V2 Vn-1VnC1,4
C1,5
C1,6C2,4 Cn-2,4Cn-1,4
C2,5 Cn-2,5Cn-1,5
C2,6 Cn-2,6 Cn-1,6
 
 
Figure 17. Constraint graph.  
Without the circle of fifths modulation assumption, each node in the constraint graph would have twelve 
outgoing arcs instead of three, representi ng the possibility of modulating to any key at any time. Relaxing the 
major -key constraint (C 3) allows modulations to minor keys. With twelve keys and two qualities (major and 
minor), each node would have twenty -four outgoing arcs. The resulting graph is s till a DAG. After the 
preconditions are evaluated, only one constraint will be active between adjacent nodes. From the perspective of 
a solution search, the graph is now a tree, since a search examines only the active constraints.  
The structure of the cons traint graph ensures a backtrack -free search. This constraint graph is ordered, meaning 
that the nodes are examined in a particular order (V 1 through V n). In such a graph, the width  of a node is the 
number of arcs that connect that node to its predecessors . The width of an ordering is the maximum width of all 
the nodes, and the width of the graph is the minimum  width of all possible orderings.  (A tree is a graph of width 
one.)  The following theorem gives a relationship between the width of a graph and the  tractability of search 
(Dechter  1990) . 
 An ordered constraint graph is backtrack -free if the level of directional 
strong consistency along this order is greater than the width of the ordered 
graph.  
The algorithm given in this paper enfor ces directional two -consistency on an ordered graph of width one, 
ensuring that the search will be backtrack -free. 
3.2.2  Complexity analysis  
It is important to note that in a worst -case analysis, Chord Space and Cadence Space are the same magnitude. A 
cadence mu st be at least three chords long, and cadences cannot overlap. A piece with a cadence in every 
possible location would contain at most | V|/3 cadences. In tonal music, however, cadences are rarely found in 
such close proximity.  
The following analyses first investigate the subroutines, and then the overall algorithm in Figure 8. 
3.2.2.1  FIND_ROOT(V i) and CREATE_DOMAIN(V i) 
FIND_ROOT  executes a constant -time loop (root finding) and then CREATE_DOMAIN  fills a finite -length table 
with domain att ributes. The size of this table is a constant, independent of | V. As both these algorithms are 
called once for each chord, root -finding and domain creation for the chord list requires O(| V|) time.  
3.2.2.2  IS_CADENCE(V i) 
Creating the cadence space requires a linear  search of the chord space. At each iteration, it performs a constant -
time loop (the constant is the elaboration  variable.) Before the cadences are appended to the cadence list, they 
are put temporary list that, for each cadence, stores its first and last chords. (The result is a list that is ordered by 
the last chords of the cadences.) This temporary list is traversed in a loop. Any cadences that overlap are 
submitted to a constant -time check (  Figure 12), and a cadence gets elimi nated. Cadence Space is thus created in 
O(|V|) time.  

--- Page 20 ---
 20 3.2.2.3  MODULATE(Z k,Zk+1) 
This algorithm first creates a table of the sums of all harmonic tones, relative to all twelve keys, of the chords 
between the cadences. Creating this table requires a traversal of chor d space, with twelve constant -time 
operations per chord. This runs in O(| V|) time, and is performed only once. Although it is not specifically called 
by MODULATE , its analysis is included here for convenience. Next, it identifies modulations via table look up, or 
removing cadences from the cadence space if it finds no modulation. Thus, creating the table requires O(| V|) 
time, and MODULATE  runs in constant time. Since MODULATE  is called for each sequential cadence pair (and 
O(|Z|) = O(| V|)), finding the modul ations requires O(| V|) time.  
3.2.2.4  EVALUATE_PRECONDITIONS(Z k,Zk+1, mod_index)  
Although at first glance this algorithm appears to require O( |V|2) time, its complexity is linear in | V|. The reason 
is that the main loop, which iterates through cadence space (which is O( |V|)). When a modulation is identified 
an inner loop iterates through chord space between cadence chords Z k and Z k+1. This means that cadence chords 
can be examined twice; once in the cadence -space search, and once in the chord -space search. At most, this will 
result in O( |V| + |Z| ) operations. Since O( |Z|) is equal to O( |V|), the this algorithm runs in O( |V|) time.  
Applying arc consistency also runs in O(| V|) time. Given the nature of the constraints, we can search through 
chord space, enforcing the a ctive constraint for each V i, which limits the domain for V i+1. With the tree structure 
of G, we are assured  that once a constraint is applied, it will never need to be re -checked.  
3.2.2.5  Solution:  
Finding a solution requires a linear search of chord space and re turning the domain element for each variable. 
Almost all domains reduce to one element after the application of arc consistency; those that have more than 
one element use a constant -time table lookup (preferences) to return the best choice. This operation requires 
O(|V|) time for one solution. As demonstrated in Section 3.2.1, the search is bactrack free.  
3.2.2.6  Overall algorithm:  
We can now evaluate the complexity of the overall algorithm ( Figure 8.) Lines 2 -4 are the root -finding 
algorithm (O( |V|).) Lines 5 -13 represent the cadence identification algorithm (O( |V|).) Lines 14 -20 comprise the 
precondition evaluation algorithm (O( |V|)), followed by lines 21 -26, which apply arc -consistency (O( |V|).) 
Finally, line s 27-31 find the solution (O( |V|).) All of the sub -algorithms execute sequentially, thus making the 
overall algorithm a series of linear -time operations; it therefore runs in O( |V|) time.  
4 RESULTS  
The source material analyzed here come from Das Gorlitzer Ta blaturbuch, a collection of chorales written by 
Samuel Scheidt in 1650. We chose Scheidt because his work fits the assumptions we impose, but has sufficient 
harmonic motion to make it useful test material. A brief discussion follows each analysis.  

--- Page 21 ---
 21 
I IV6  IV   I  ii I6  I IV I           I  I6  I IV  I  IV6 v V/V V
I    IV64 I6  IV  I      I    vi6 V    V I    V  I    V  I      I6 I IV I6 I ii
VI     VI vi    vi V65/V   V  I6     V6  I     V   I        IV  IV  viiø6  V7#
I6   I   I   V6           I           I     V           V            I1
6
11
15
 
Figure 18. In Dulci Jubilo.  
After removing the false cadences, the key of all cadences in Z is G. This means that there are no modulations, 
and constraint C i,4 is active for all nodes. Arc consistency thus elimi nates all νi,d, where νi,d ≠ 7 (where 7 is the 
pitch value of G.) The secondary functions in measures 5 and 12 are the result of preferences employed when 
searching for the solution.  

--- Page 22 ---
 22 
I  iii IV   V  I  IV ii V V7 I     I  I6 I   V6 I V vi  iii I6 ii6 V7  I
I   IV  IV6
  I  V6
  vi7
 V/V   V                  C:V  I I6
 IV ↑ I  V7 
I
                           G:I       ii      V64
 V I       bVII
 
Figure 19. Von Himmel Hoch (1 ). 
In this example, Z contained the cadences {C,C,C,C,G,G,C} after false cadences were removed. The first of the 
two G cadences is at the end of measure 7. MODULATE  examines the passage between this cadence and the C 
cadence at the end of measure 5, and de cides that the modulation occurs at the first chord of measure 8. Since 
the next cadence in the list is another G cadence (measure 9), the tonal center between these two cadence chords 
is G. Since this is a “down” modulation, MODULATE  looks for the last le ading tone to the new key (F natural in 
this case, found by a reverse  search.) From there, it looks for the pivot chord, one whose function  is V in the 
current key and I in the new key. It assigns all current key to the chords up to the pivot chord, and th e new key 
to the chords following the pivot.  
Another chorale, In Dulci Jubilo , had an analysis in which the entire piece was in one key (G major) except for 
a small group of chords, corresponding to about a measure in the piece. In this area, the analysis showed a 
modulation to the dominant (D major). According to a music theorist, this is not correct, or at least very 
unlikely, not making any ‘ “musical sense.” From a listener’s perspective, however, it may make more sense. 
The analysis resulted from two D  major cadences in close proximity, which might sound to the listener as if the 
piece briefly suggests the dominant before returning to the tonic. As resolving this is more of an interpretation 
rather than a rule, we do not see this result as a failing of the algorithm.  
5 DISCUSSION  
The goal of any theory is to represent a system with a set of concise and powerful rules. A well -formed theory 
summarizes and yields insights to the system, and presents a framework that others may examine and 
reproduce. An algori thm designed to encapsulate tonal music theory must possess these properties if it is to be a 
useful tool for approaching the problem.  
5.1 Earlier attempts  
Winograd, treating music as a grammar, developed a hierarchical set of parsing rules that act on a list of chords 
(Winograd 1968) . Whereas he clearly enumerates the rules, hierarchies, and tables used in his implementation, 
the description of the implementation itself is high level, lacking necessary detail for a thorough analysis. This 
make s it difficult to reproduce his results.  

--- Page 23 ---
 23 Using a rule -based system, Maxwell represents harmonic analysis essentially as a table lookup (Maxwell 1992) . 
In addition to the lack of a clear description of the algorithms, his presentation of t he rules involved is 
sometimes ambiguous or missing altogether. For example, this is the description of one such rule:  
“IF a sonority is not tertian OR it is accented AND dissonant AND the next sonority is 
tertian AND the next sonority has a lower tertian -dissonance level OR it is unaccented 
AND dissonant AND the last sonority is tertian AND the last sonority has a lower 
tertian -dissonance level, THEN the sonority is dissonant in context .” 
Given this description, there are several possible implementations o f this rule. (This is only one of over 50 such 
rules.) With ambiguous and omitted rule definitions, along with no description of the algorithms, it is 
impossible either to reproduce or to analyze Maxwell's results.  
Another problem inherent with a rule -base d approach is that a rule -based system requires a "proliferation of 
rules that tend never to reach an end" (Ebcioglu 1992) . Suppose the scope of the project were to analyze just 
one composer, such as Bach. It would be no small task to deve lop the a knowledge base of all the situations in 
which Bach "breaks the rules" of tonal harmony, much less represent all his stylistic idiosyncrasies. Even if 
such a set of rules were created, it would certainly need amending to be used to analyze another  composer's 
work. Since constraints are a type of rule, our work may also suffer from this problem as we extend it to analyze 
more complex music.  
The Serioso program (Temperley and Sleator 1999)  takes a comprehensive approach, separating i ts analysis 
into three sections, (meter, key, and harmony), and combining these separate analyses into a final interpretation. 
It addresses many of the difficulties encountered by the approaches described above, summarizing its 
performance by a set of pref erence rules. It introduces some intriguing ideas and insights, such as the line of 
fifths model (Temperley 1997) .. There is no description of how the preference rules are implemented, leaving 
no opportunity for their analysis.  
5.2 Our represe ntation  
The goal of this work is not only to model harmonic analysis,, but also to present it in a formal framework that 
facilitates analysis and duplication. We make no claim that our approach more comprehensive or correct than 
any of the others previousl y mentioned. Ours is an attempt to model some key insights into harmonic analysis 
and to present it a more accessible way.  
The central idea in our approach is that cadences form a basis for identifying the presence of tonal centers 
within a composition. Th e notion of using cadences as musical guides is not new; Lerdahl, in correspondence 
with Jackendoff  (Jackendoff 1991)  suggests using cadences as aids for metrical analysis. We posit that they 
also play a vital role in determining the tona l structure, serving as “musical footprints” of the path the tonal 
center takes throughout the piece. From this, we develop heuristics to determine where cadences occur and 
where the tonality changes in the piece. Once the tonal centers are identified, har monic analysis reduces to little 
more than a parsing problem. We, therefore, focus our algorithm on the identification of tonal centers.  
We chose the CSP framework for our approach because of its elegance in representing the problem and because 
it is readi ly analyzed by formal methods. By making the variable a chord rather than the individual notes, we 
take advantage of properties of chords, while retaining the ability to constrain their analysis by their attributes. 
A major point in favor of our approach i s its simplicity. Instead of using a large set of rules, we employ a series 
of simple pattern -matching and search algorithms to accomplish the task. We freely admit, however, that this is 
neither a comprehensive nor final solution to the problem. Certainly , some of the algorithms are not sufficient 
for analyzing all types of tonal music; our assumptions need to be relaxed, and more complicated test cases are 
necessary. The complexity of the algorithms may very well increase as the work progresses; the music  analyzed 
in this paper is relatively simple, and as more complex pieces are introduced, the sophistication of the 
algorithms will have to improve accordingly.  

--- Page 24 ---
 24 6 SUMMARY  
In the past, attempts at algorithms that perform harmonic analysis have suffered from a lack of formal 
presentation of the methods involved. Regardless of the successes of these efforts, analysis and duplication of 
their results is ambiguous and difficult. The purpose of this work is to encapsulate the process of harmonic 
analysis in a precis e and well -studied framework that avails itself to analysis and reproduction.  
Harmonic analysis is similar to natural -language parsing in that it incorporates rules and preferences, and like 
understanding natural language, is considered to be a task perfor med without difficulty by those who are 
familiar with it (Lerdahl and Jackendoff 1983) . By modeling the rules of tonal harmony as constraints and the 
preferences as search preferences, the CSP framework provides an elegant algorithmic repr esentation of 
harmonic analysis.  
Our implementation employs a series of algorithms that employ various tonal harmony rules to identify tonal 
centers within a composition. Establishing this information is the heart of harmonic analysis, as it reduces the 
remainder of the problem to little more than parsing. Aiding our algorithms are several assumptions about tonal 
music, which simplify the task. They provide additional constraints on interpreting the compositions.  
The music used to evaluate our system is a s ubset of tonal music, and that the assumptions we made must be 
relaxed in order to have a robust tonal harmonic -analysis system.  
REFERENCES   
Aldwell, E. and C. Schachter (1978). Harmony and Voice Leading . New York, Harcourt Brace Jovanovic h, Inc.  
Cook, N. (1987). “The perception of large -scale tonal closure.” Music Perception  5: 197-206. 
Darr, T. (1997). A constraint -satisfaction problem computational model for distributed part -selection problems. 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science  Department . Ann Arbor, The University of Michigan.  
Darr, T. P., W.P. Birmingham, N. Scala (1998). A MAD Approach for solving part -selection problems . 
Artificial Intelligence in Design,  Lisbon, Portugal., Kluwer.  
Dechter, R.(1990) Constraint Networks. Encyclopedia of AI : 276-285. 
Ebcioglu, K. (1992). An Expert System for Harmonizing Chorales in the Style of J. S. Bach. understanding 
Music with AI: Perspectives on Music Cognition . M. Balaban, K. Ebcioglu and O. Laske. Menlo Park, AAAI 
Press : 295-333. 
Hindem ith, P. (1970). The Craft of Musical Composition . New York, Schott Music Corporation.  
Jackendoff, R. (1991). “Musical Parsing and Musical Affect.” Music Perception  9(2): 199 -230. 
Lerdahl, F. (1988). “Tonal Pitch Space.” Music Perception  5(3): 315 -350. 
Lerdahl, F. and R. Jackendoff (1983). A Generative Theory of Tonal Music . Cambridge, Mass, MIT Press.  
Maxwell, H. J. (1992). An Expert System for Harmonizing Analysis of Tonal Music. Understanding Music with 
AI: Perspectives on Music Cognition . M. Balaban, K. Ebcioglu and O. Laske. Menlo Park, AAAI Press : 335-
353. 
Temperley, D. (1997). “An Algorithm for Harmonic Analysis.” Music Perception  15(1): 31 -68. 
Temperley, D. and D. Sleator (1999). “Modeling Meter and Harmony: A Preference -Rule Approach.” 
Computer Music  Journal  23(1): 10 -27. 
Vos, P. G. and E. W. V. Geenen (1996). “A Parallel -Processing Key -Finding Model.” Music Perception  14(2): 
185-224. 
Winograd, T. (1968). “Linguistics and the Computer Analysis of Tonal Harmony.” The Journal of Music 
Theory  12: 2-49. 

