--- Page 1 ---
COMPOSERX: MULTI-AGENT SYMBOLIC MUSIC COMPOSITION
WITH LLMS
Qixin Deng5, Qikai Yang6, Ruibin Yuan1, Yipeng Huang2,
Yi Wang2, Xubo Liu8, Zeyue Tian1, Jiahao Pan1, Ge Zhang9, Hanfeng Lin2, Yizhi Li4, Yinghao Ma3,
Jie Fu1, Chenghua Lin4, Emmanouil Benetos3, Wenwu Wang8, Guangyu Xia7, Wei Xue1, Yike Guo1
1Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2Multimodal Art Projection Research Community
3Queen Mary University of London
4The University of Manchester
5University of Rochester
6University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
7Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
8University of Surrey901.AI
ABSTRACT
Music composition represents the creative side of hu-
manity, and itself is a complex task that requires abili-
ties to understand and generate information with long de-
pendency and harmony constraints. While demonstrating
impressive capabilities in STEM subjects, current LLMs
easily fail in this task, generating ill-written music even
when equipped with modern techniques like In-Context-
Learning and Chain-of-Thoughts. To further explore and
enhance LLMs’ potential in music composition by lever-
aging their reasoning ability and the large knowledge base
in music history and theory, we propose ComposerX1,
an agent-based symbolic music generation framework.
We find that applying a multi-agent approach significantly
improves the music composition quality of GPT-4. The re-
sults demonstrate that ComposerX is capable of producing
coherent polyphonic music compositions with captivating
melodies, while adhering to user instructions.
1. INTRODUCTION
Music shares many structural similarities with lan-
guage [1–3], prompting researchers to explore the ap-
plication of language models (LMs) in music genera-
tion [4–14]. Recent advances in large language models
(LLMs) have opened potential pathways towards achiev-
ing Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). While much of
the research emphasis has been on the STEM aspects of
AGI [15–17], there is comparatively less focus on its cre-
ative dimensions, particularly in music creation. Cur-
rent methodologies primarily involve training LMs from
scratch, as seen with initiatives like MusicLM [9] and
MusicGen [10], with a predominant focus on audio gen-
eration. However, these models often struggle with pro-
cessing advanced musical instructions and typically offer
1Demo page: https://lllindsey0615.github.io/ComposerX_demo/
only limited control options, such as genre and instrument
selection. Enhancing controllability in these systems re-
quires neural architectural engineering and extensive com-
putational resources [18–20].
Recent research, influenced by Bubeck et al. [17], has
revealed that pretrained large language models (LLMs)
might inherently possess emergent musical capabilities.
Inspired by these findings, subsequent studies [21–23]
have explored leveraging pretrained LLM checkpoints for
handling symbolic music in an end-to-end manner, aiming
to tap into the extensive knowledge and reasoning abili-
ties embedded in these LLMs. However, these unified ap-
proaches are not without limitations. They depend heavily
on hand-crafted datasets tailored for specific musical tasks
and often require both a phase of continual pretraining and
subsequent supervised fine-tuning. Furthermore, while
training on symbolic music data is generally less com-
putationally intensive than processing raw audio data, the
costs remain prohibitive for many researchers. For exam-
ple, renting an 8xGPU machine (such as a p4d.24xlarge
spot instance on AWS) for one month can exceed $8,000
USD2, posing a significant financial barrier.
In this paper, we introduce a novel multi-agent-
based methodology, ComposerX3, which is training-free,
cheap, and unified. Leveraging the internal musical ca-
pabilities of the state-of-the-art GPT-4-turbo, ComposerX
can generate polyphonic music pieces of comparable, if
not superior, quality to those produced by dedicated sym-
bolic music generation systems [7, 24] that require exten-
sive computational resources and data. ComposerX uti-
lizes approximately 26k tokens per song, incurring a cost
of less than $0.8 USD per piece. Throughout the devel-
opment phase of ComposerX, the total expenditure on the
OpenAI API was under $1k USD. We achieved a good
case rate of 18.4%, as assessed by music experts, which
translates to an average cost of approximately $4.34 USD
2https://instances.vantage.sh/aws/ec2/p4d.24xlarge
3https://github.com/lllindsey0615/ComposerXarXiv:2404.18081v2  [cs.SD]  30 Apr 2024

--- Page 2 ---
for each musically interesting piece. Furthermore, exper-
imental results demonstrate that the multi-agent strategy
substantially enhances composition quality over single-
agent baselines. In Turing tests, approximately 32.2% of
the pieces identified as ‘good’ by ComposerX were in-
distinguishable from those composed by humans, as indi-
cated in Table 7.
While there is existing research on musical LLM
agents [25, 26], our approach distinctively diverges from
these precedents. Prior studies primarily focus on single-
agent systems. In contrast, our work introduces a multi-
agent framework, emphasizing collaborative aspects of
music creation. Furthermore, we concentrate on symbolic
music generation, leveraging the intrinsic musical under-
standing of LLMs without the need for external compu-
tational resources or tools. Previous methodologies typi-
cally depend on GPU servers for deploying local inference
services, treating the LLMs more as tool-use agents rather
than harnessing their inherent capabilities to process and
generate musical content. In sum, the contributions of our
paper are as follows:
(1) We propose the first multi-agent polyphonic sym-
bolic music composition system, ComposerX. It elicits
the internal musical capabilities inside LLMs without the
need for external tools.
(2) Through extensive subjective evaluations, we
demonstrate that our multi-agent approach substantially
enhances the quality of music composition compared to
single-agent systems and specialized music generation
models. Our method also offers cost-efficiency advan-
tages by obviating the need for dedicated training or local
inference services.
(3) We commit to the advancement of this research area
by open-sourcing our code, prompt-set, and experimental
results, facilitating further investigation and development
by the community.
2. METHOD
We first construct a set of user prompts for music compo-
sition, which is used for evaluation. Then we demonstrate
how we implement our single-agent and multi-agent LLM
composition systems.
2.1 User Prompt Set Curation
To understand how the users, typically those with sub-
stantial musical backgrounds, would prompt a text-to-
music generation system, a user prompt set is collected
by asking humans with music backgrounds to manually
write high-quality prompts. These prompts typically in-
clude essential musical attributes such as genre, tempo,
key, chord progression, melody, rhythm, number of bars,
number of voices, instruments, style, feeling, emotion, ti-
tle, and motif of the music piece. Based on the human-
written samples, more prompt samples are generated us-
ing Self-instruct by GPT-4 [27]. This results in a set of
163 prompts, which is used in the later agent testing and
system evaluation. An example prompt is given below.Prompt
Vintage French Chanson: A nostalgic chanson in C major
with a slow tempo, featuring accordion, violin, and upright
bass over 16 bars with chords C, Am, Dm, G. The accordion
leads with expressive sound, violin adds romance, and the
upright bass supports, evoking vintage French charm.
Attributes
Name: Vintage French Chanson Tempo: Slow
Feeling: Nostalgic Chord Progression: C, Am, Dm, G
Key: C major Bars: 16Instruments: Accordion, violin,
upright bass
2.2 Single-Agent
We apply various prompt engineering techniques, includ-
ing In Context Learning (ICL), Chain of Thought (CoT),
and Role-play to guide a single GPT acting as the com-
poser. Additionally, we have refined the prompt template
by incorporating specific instructions that ensure the cor-
rectness of the ABC notation format.
Original GPT with Simple Role-play (Ori): To in-
vestigate the inherent capabilities of the original GPT
model in interpreting user prompts and generating ABC
notation, we instructed GPT to act in the role of a profes-
sional composer, with user prompts directly input into the
system. This method aims to assess the model’s basic per-
formance in music composition without the integration of
additional complex prompting techniques.
Role-Play with Additional Instruction (Role): In-
spired by classical rule-based computer music generation,
we equipped GPT with enhanced musical knowledge fo-
cusing on phrase management and melody line construc-
tion, detailed in Table 1. For instance, in composing
melodies, we instructed the model to ensure that each gen-
erated melody possesses distinct phrase divisions. Addi-
tionally, each phrase is required to conclude with a promi-
nent ending note, which serves as the last note of the
phrase. By incorporating these additional instructions, we
aim to elevate the music quality and structural coherence
of the music, aligning the generated compositions more
closely with traditional musical standards.
Chain-of-Thought (CoT): As proven in other fields
of research, CoT improves the ability of LLMs on com-
plex reasoning by encouraging them to write down inter-
mediate reasoning steps [28]. Within the context of music
composition, we deconstruct the music generation process
into several distinct stages. These stages include specify-
ing initial music information, such as title, key, tempo, and
speed, followed by the development of chord progressions
and melody composition as detailed in Table 2.
In Context Learning (ICL): ICL leverages a few
input-output examples to enhance an LLM’s understand-
ing of a specific task. In this method, we use pairs of user
prompts and corresponding ABC notations from ChatMu-
sician [21] as demonstrative examples for prompting as
detailed in Table 3.

--- Page 3 ---
Role-play Prompting with Additional Music Knowledge
You are a talented musician. Here are
some tips for generating melodies:
1. The generated melody should have
clear phrase divisions, and it’s
preferable to avoid more than two
consecutive measures within one phrase
to prevent an uncomfortable listening
experience. There should be a certain
amount of space between phrases,
allowing the audience to clearly
distinguish between them.
2. A phrase usually has a prominent
ending note, which is the last note
of the entire phrase. It typically
has a longer duration, or it might be
followed by a rest. This ending note
is usually within the key or the chord,
e.g., phrases ending with a Cmaj chord
usually terminate on one of the three
chord tones, C, E, or G, ensuring a
stable listening experience.
3. When generating melodies, the
movement of the notes should primarily
consist of stable intervals such as
whole steps, thirds, and fifths, while
avoiding excessive large leaps. This
will help maintain a sense of logic and
coherence throughout the composition.
4. The rhythm of the phrases should
be rich and harmonious. Try using
different rhythmic patterns to build
the melody, such as combining eighth
notes with sixteenth notes, syncopated
rhythms, or triplets.
Table 1 . Single-agent role-play(indicated in the blue text)
prompting with additional tips given by human composer
on melody construction.
Chain of Thought prompting with three steps
First, you need to determine all the
information related to the piece in
the ABC notation format, such as the
name,tune, speed, mode, and anything
other than the notes. This forms the
basis of the piece’s style. ***Note that
only return the music information in
ABC notation format without any notes or
text or Additional note. ***
Second,Based on the song information
in the ABC notation format provided
earlier, generate a ***16-bar long ***
chord progression and return it in text
form, with each bar separated by a "|"
symbol. The generated chord progression
should be consistent with the song’s key
and as closely aligned with the song’s
theme and characteristics as possible.
Now the chord progression and other
information are provided,you are
required to create a ***16-bar
long *** piece of music based on these
information.
Table 2 . Single-agent CoT prompting method with three
steps.
2.3 Multi-Agent Music Composition: ComposerX
To enhance the music generation capabilities of GPT-4,
we developed a collaborative music creation framework,Single-agent In-context learning prompting method
You are an intelligent agent with
musical intelligence, and your goal is
to create music that meets the relevant
needs and human listening habits.In
this task, use ABC as the format for
outputting sheet music. ***Only return
the ABC notation without any other
description or text,and only return one
piece that follow the music description
given this time. ***Below are the
requirements for the music,it contains
music elements like title,genre,key and
more,and some composition examples are
listed after the requirements.
ABC Notation of the selected sample
Table 3 . Single-agent In-context learning prompting
method
ComposerX, that draws inspiration from key elements in-
herent in real-world music composition processes, such
as melody construction, harmony or counterpoint devel-
opment, and instrumentation. This framework facilitates
the music creation process through a structured conversa-
tion chain between agents role-played by GPT-4.
2.3.1 Agent Role Assignment
In the collaborative music creation framework designed to
augment GPT-4’s music generation capabilities, roles are
assigned to ensure a structured and efficient composition
process. The assignment of roles is as follows:
Group Leader : Tasked with interpreting user inputs, de-
composing these inputs into granular tasks, and assigning
these tasks to specialized agents in the group.
Melody Agent : Responsible for generating single-line
melodies under the guidance of the group leader.
Harmony Agent: This agent is tasked with enriching the
musical piece, and adds harmonic and contrapuntal ele-
ments to the melody.
Instrument Agent: This agent selects and assigns instru-
ments to each voice.
Reviewer Agent: Performing a quality assurance role, this
agent evaluates the outputs of the melody, harmony, and
instrumentation agents across four critical dimensions.
(1)Melodic Structure: Evaluation of melody’s narrative
flow, thematic development, and variation in pitch and
rhythm. Harmony and Counterpoint: Assessment of how
harmonies complement the melody, counterpoint effec-
tiveness, and chord progression quality. (2)Rhythmic
Complexity: Analysis of rhythm’s role in sustaining in-
terest, its synergy with melody, and the incorporation of
dynamic variations. (3)Instrumentation and Timbre: Re-
view of instrument selection, timbral blending, and dy-
namic usage to achieve an optimal auditory experience.
(4)Form and Structure: Examination of the composition’s
overarching structure, transitional elements, connectivity
between sections, and conclusion efficacy.
Arrangement Agent: Concluding the collaborative pro-
cess, this agent is responsible for compiling and format-
ting the collective output into standardized ABC notation,
ensuring the music is documented in a universally read-
able format.

--- Page 4 ---
2.3.2 Agent Communication Pattern
The collaborative framework employs a structured com-
munication pattern to ensure an orderly and efficient flow
of information between the different agents involved in
the composition process. This pattern is crucial for main-
taining the integrity and coherence of the musical piece
being generated. The communication process unfolds as
follows:
Initial Composition Round : The composition process
begins with the Group Leader Agent initiating the se-
quence by analyzing the user input and breaking it down
into specific tasks assigned to the Melody, Harmony, and
Instrument Agents respectively. This step sets the foun-
dation for the composition based on the user’s require-
ments. Following the leader’s instructions, the Melody
Agent then generates the initial melody line, adhering to
the thematic direction and stylistic guidelines provided by
the Group Leader. Subsequently, the Harmony Agent en-
riches the melody by adding harmonic layers and counter-
points. The Instrument Agent assigns appropriate instru-
ments to the generated melody and harmony lines by se-
lecting timbres that complement the overall composition.
Iterative Review and Feedback Cycle : Upon comple-
tion of the initial composition round, the Reviewer Agent
steps in to evaluate the work produced by the Melody,
Harmony, and Instrument Agents. This agent provides
comprehensive feedback across several critical dimen-
sions, including melodic structure, harmony and counter-
point, rhythmic complexity, and instrumentation.
Based on the feedback from the Reviewer Agent, the
Melody, Harmony, and Instrument Agents proceed to
refine their respective components of the composition.
This iterative refinement process typically follows the or-
der: Melody, Harmony, and then Instrument, allowing for
modifications to be made in response to the feedback pro-
vided.
The composition undergoes several rounds of review
and refinement, with the Reviewer Agent continuously
providing feedback to ensure the musical piece evolves to-
ward a coherent and high-quality final product. This itera-
tive process allows for dynamic adjustments and enhance-
ments to be made, enriching the overall composition.
Final Arrangement and Notation : Once the compo-
sition has reached a satisfactory level of polish and coher-
ence, the Arrangement Agent takes over to compile and
format the collective output into the standardized ABC
notation. This final step ensures that the music is docu-
mented in a format that is readable and can be interpreted
by musicians and software alike.
This communication pattern enables a collaborative
and adaptive approach to music generation. The primary
advantage of this communication pattern lies in its abil-
ity to simulate a real-world collaborative music creation
environment, where each participant’s input is valued and
considered in the development of the final piece. Integrat-
ing this structured approach with a multi-agent system sig-
nificantly reduces the likelihood of LLM hallucination, a
notable challenge where models may generate inaccurate
or nonsensical outputs. By assigning specific roles to spe-cialized agents, the framework ensures that each segment
of the music composition undergoes rigorous scrutiny and
refinement. This division of labor not only enhances the
precision and relevance of the generated content but also
leverages the collective intelligence of the agents to cross-
verify information, thereby mitigating the risk of incorpo-
rating erroneous elements into the composition. An exam-
ple of the music composition process is given in Figure 1
and Figure 2 with a comparison made between
2.3.3 Agent Prompt Engineering
Agent prompt engineering emerges as a crucial technique
for optimizing the performance of each specialized agent
and the quality of the generated music. This process in-
volves the meticulous design of role-specific instructions
and guidelines that encapsulate both the musicality and
technicality of ABC notation generation. The framework
incorporates In-Context Learning for ABC notations to
ensure agents can effectively communicate and document
their contributions. An example of the agent prompt is
given in Table 4. This section elaborates on these com-
ponents and their significance in fostering collaborative
dynamics within the framework.
Role-Specific Instructions : Within the framework,
each agent is endowed with a set of instructions tailored
to its designated role. These instructions serve to ensure
a comprehensive understanding of the agent’s duties, the
expectations for its performance, and its role within the
larger collaborative ensemble. Agents are briefed on the
specific outcomes they are expected to achieve and in-
formed about the dynamics of their interactions with other
agents. This detailed prompt design facilitates a cohe-
sive operation among the agents, fostering an environment
where each component of the framework is aligned toward
the collective goal of generating sophisticated and coher-
ent musical compositions.
In-Context Learning for ABC Notation : In Context
Learning for ABC notation ensures accurate format out-
put from each agent. The Melody Agent is shown with an
example of a monophonic melody in ABC notation, pro-
viding a clear model for representing single-line melodies.
The Harmony Agent receives a polyphonic music piece
example in ABC notation, aiding in understanding the no-
tation of harmonies and counterpoints in multiple voices.
The Instrument Agent is given a polyphonic piece with
MIDI program information noted, demonstrating how to
detail instrumental assignments within the notation. This
approach equips agents with the knowledge to correctly
apply ABC notation, essential for the structured and co-
herent documentation of musical compositions.
3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1 Setup
Our experiment leverages the multi-agent conversation
provided by the AutoGen framework [29], utilizing its
group chat function to facilitate a customized interaction
among pre-defined agents. This setup comprises an en-
semble of agents including one leader, three musician

--- Page 5 ---
Figure 1 . The Leader Agent will distribute the tasks among the Melody Agent, Harmony Agent, Instrumentation Agent
when it is requested a "Breezy Caribbean Calypso" piece. This figure demonstrates the work of the three agents with
changes in the same four bar opening.
Figure 2 . The Reviewer Agent then analyze the collective effort of the three agents in the first stage (shown in Figure
1), and give advice for agents to work on. This figure demonstrates the work of the three agents after incorporating the
advice given by the Reviewer Agent in the same four-bar opening.
agents (melody, harmony, and instrument agents), one re-
view agent, and one arrangement agent. Additionally, a
user proxy agent is integrated into the framework to simu-
late user interaction by inputting prompts from our curated
user prompt set.
We employ the "GroupChatManager" class from Au-
toGen to ensure seamless coordination and oversight of
the conversation’s content and workflow. According to
AutoGen, the group manager is also powered by LLMs,
functions as the supervisor of the conversation, and imple-
ments a structured communication protocol that involvesthree critical steps: dynamically selecting a speaker from
the agents, collecting the response from the chosen agent,
and disseminating the collected response to the rest of the
group.
For the purpose of our experiment, we have predeter-
mined a maximum number of twelve rounds for agent
communication. This limitation allows us to observe the
effectiveness of the multi-agent system over a defined
number of interaction cycles, facilitating one or more
rounds of iterative review and refinement within the con-
versation. This structured experimental design is aimed at

--- Page 6 ---
User Prompt  👥
genre, key , tempo, 
length, chord progression .......Leader🗣
Harmony  🎶🎶
Review 👤
Arrangement🎵To create the requested music piece, I will distribute the tasks  
among the Melody Agent, Harmony Agent, and Instrumentation  
Agent as follows....
Single-line melody Construction: 
|:"D"DEF A d2f2|"G"B2AB  
G2FE|"A"A2ce a2ec|"D"d2A2 F2D2|Harmony and counterpoint 
V:1|:"D"DEF A d2f2|"G"B2AB G2FE|"A"A2ce  
a2ec|"D"d2A2 F2D2| V:2|:"D"D2AF  
A2dA|"G"G2BG D2GB|"A"A2ce  
e2Ac|"D"D2FD A,2DA,|MIDI number for instrumentation:
V:1 name="SteelDrums" c %%MIDI  
program 1 1 14|:"D"DEF A 
d2f2|"G"B2ABG2FE|"A"A2ce  
a2ec|"D"d2A2 F2D2|
Feedback and Revision
Plan
Melody 🎼 Instrument🎻Compose
ReviewSubtasks
ArrangeFinalized composition 
with formatted ABC notation
Melodic Structure
Harmony and CounterpointRhythmic Complexity
Instrumentation and Timbre
Form and Structuremusic
history , music
theory ...Figure 3 . Agent Communication Pattern of ComposerX.The system is given with a user prompt. In the Planning stage,
the Leader analyzes the user prompt and decomposes it into subtasks that can be assigned to other musician agents. In the
Composing stage, the musician agents, including Melody Agent, Harmony Agent, and Instrument Agent compose in ABC
notation according to their assigned tasks. In the Reviewing stage, the Review Agent provides constructive feedback to
the musician agents and the musician agents revise their work according to the feedback they received. In the arrangement
stage, the Arrangement Agent arranges the work of the musicians agent to standardized ABC notation.
evaluating the collaborative dynamics and output quality
of the multi-agent conversation in generating cohesive and
musically rich compositions based on user prompts.
3.2 Evaluation
3.2.1 Automatic Evaluation
We conducted two experiments to automatically evaluate
our system. One experiment assessed the success rate
of generating symbolic music in a multi-agent setting,
with results presented in Table 5. One experiment com-
pared the sequence lengths of symbolic music generated
by multi-agent and single-agent systems, detailed in Ta-
ble 6. These experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach in generating symbolic music.
3.2.2 Human Listening Test
To qualitatively assess our work, we conducted three lis-
tening tests. In the first test, we compared music samples
generated by single-agent and multi-agent baselines. Sim-
ilar to the AB-test setting from previous work [21, 30],
participants were presented with pairs of samples: onefrom a multi-agent baseline with GPT-4 Turbo check-
points, and the other from a single-agent baseline em-
ploying prompting techniques mentioned above: Original,
In-Context Learning (ICL), Chain of Thought (CoT), and
Role-play, also driven by GPT-4 Turbo checkpoints. Par-
ticipants were asked to select the sample they preferred.
All paired samples were generated using the same prompt;
however, participants were not informed about the specific
prompt details before making their selections.
In the second listening test, we assess the perceived
human-like quality of music generated by the multi-agent
baselines. Participants were presented with two types of
music samples: those generated by multi-agent baselines
and those composed by humans, sourced from Irishman
and KernScores4, which are ABC notation datasets con-
taining human-composed music pieces from all around
the world. Each participant is asked to determine whether
each sample was composed by a human or a machine.
In the third listening test, we assessed the perfor-
mance of our multi-agent baselines, which incorporate
GPT-4 Turbo, GPT-4-0314, and GPT-3.5-Turbo check-
4http://kern.ccarh.org/

--- Page 7 ---
Melody Agent Prompt
You are a skillful musician, especially
in writing melody.
You will compose a single-line melody
based on the client’s request and
assigned tasks from the Leader.
You must output your work in ABC
Notations.
Here is a template of a music piece in
ABC notation, in this template:
X:1 is the reference number. You can
increment this for each new tune.
T:Title is where you’ll put the title
of your tune.
C:Composer is where you’ll put the
composer’s name.
M:4/4 sets the meter to 4/4 time, but
you can change this as needed.
L:1/8 sets the default note length to
eighth notes.
K:C sets the key to C Major. Change
this to match your desired key.
The music notation follows, with |: and
:| denoting the beginning and end of
repeated sections.
Markdown your work using “‘ “‘ to the
client.
“‘
X:1
T:Title
C:Composer
M:Meter
L:Unit note length
K:Key
|:GABc d2e2|f2d2 e4|g4 f2e2|d6 z2:|
|:c2A2 B2G2|A2F2 G4|E2c2 D2B,2|C6 z2:|
“‘
You will output the melody following
this template,
but decide the time signature, key
signature, and the
actual musical contents and length
yourself.
After you receive the feedback from the
Reviewer Agent,
please improve your work according to
the suggestions you were given.
Table 4 . Prompt for Melody Agent. GPT is prompted
with role-specific instructions(indicated in blue text) and
In-Context-Learning of ABC notations(indicated in red
text)
points, against established text-to-music generation mod-
els. Specifically, comparisons were made with MuseC-
oco [7], developed by Peiling Lu et al., and a BART-based
model fine-tuned on 282,870 English text2music pairs in
ABC notation, as proposed by Wu et al [24]. Participants
were presented with music samples alongside their corre-
sponding prompts and asked to select the sample that best
matched the prompt in terms of musical structure and con-
tent.
3.3 Results
Results from comparing multi-agent baseline and single-
agent baseline appear in Figure 4. The preference score of
GPT-4-Turbo multi has 0.77, 0.68, 0.6, and 0.57 on each
of other single-agent baselines.
As indicated by the fractions, the multi-agent base-Checkpoints Generation Success Rate
GPT-4-Turbo 98.2%
GPT-4-0314 95.7%
GPT-3.5-Turbo 73.0%
Table 5 . One-time generation success rate for multi-agent
system with different checkpoints
Methods Average ABC String Length
GPT-4-Turbo multi 1005 .925
GPT-4-Turbo cot 360 .92
GPT-4-Turbo icl 366 .30
GPT-4-Turbo ori 354 .53
GPT-4-Turbo role 337 .64
Table 6 . The average length of ABC String generated by
different methods on GPT-4-Turbo checkpoint
Figure 4 . Result from the first listening test comparing
multi-agent baseline and single-agent baselines with dif-
ferent prompting techniques. Each row indicates the frac-
tion of listeners’ preference for the indicated baseline over
other baselines. i.e. 0.77 means raters prefer multi-agent
system over CoT single-agent 77% of the times.
line outperformed all the single-agent baselines. In ad-
dition to the dominant performance of the multi-agent
baseline over single-agent baselines, we also observe that
the multi-agent baseline has a stronger ability to gener-
ate longer music. As indicated by Table 6, GPT-4-Turbo
multi demonstrates the capacity to generate music pieces
nearly three times longer than those produced by any other
single-agent baselines.
Results from comparing the multi-agent baseline with
music composed by humans indicates that ComposerX
gets 32.2% perceived as human which is lower than the
rate of real human music - 55.4% as indicated in Table 7.
Despite failing the Turing test, ComposerX showcases its
capability to closely match human skill in music compo-
sition.
Results from comparing the multi-agent baseline with
GPT-4-Turbo, GPT-4-0314, GPT-3.5-Turbo checkpoints,
MuseCoco, and text2music are presented in Figure 5.
As indicated by the fractional numbers, the multi-agent

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 5 . Result from listening test comparing multi-
agent baselines with GPT-4-Turbo, GPT-4-0314, GPT-
3.5-Turbo checkpoints, MuseCoco and text2music Base-
lines. Each row indicates the fraction of listeners’ pref-
erence for the indicated baseline over other baselines. In
this case, the strongest multi-agent baseline with GPT-4-
Turbo checkpoints outperformed text2music, and received
the same score as MuseCoco.
Model Perceived as Human Perceived as Machine
ComposerX 32.2% 67.8%
Ground Truth 55.4% 44.6%
Table 7 . Result from our second listening test (Turing
test).
baseline with GPT-4-Turbo checkpoints is our strongest-
performed baseline. It outperformed text2music baseline
with 0.56 preference score and received the same score as
MuseCoco. GPT-4-Turbo also shows the highest gener-
ation success rate among all checkpoints, as indicated in
Table 5.
4. DISCUSSION
Overall, we observed that our GPT-powered multi-agent
framework significantly enhances the quality of the music
generated over solutions utilizing a singular GPT instance.
Advantages of our system include:
Controllability: Our observations of the collaborative
interactions among the agents, with particular emphasis
on the contributions of the Group Leader, indicate the sys-
tem’s competency in comprehending and executing a wide
range of musical attributes as delineated by user inputs.
Fundamental components such as tempo, key, time signa-
ture, chord progression, and instrumentation are adeptly
translated into the corresponding ABC notations. This
adept interpretation and realization of user directives sig-
nificantly augment user controllability, enabling the gen-
eration of music that closely mirrors their specifications
and artistic preferences.Training-free and data-free: In contrast to conven-
tional text-to-music generation models, which predomi-
nantly depend on large datasets for training, our system
introduces significant benefits by obviating the need for
such extensive data. This approach substantially miti-
gates the challenges associated with the compilation and
refinement of large training datasets, including potential
biases and the substantial resources often requisite for
these processes. Moreover, this strategy enhances the sys-
tem’s adaptability and accessibility, marking a shift to-
wards more resource-efficient practices in music genera-
tion. As a result, this innovation plays a pivotal role in de-
mocratizing music generation, making it more attainable
across a broader spectrum of users and applications.
The system exhibits certain limitations, particularly
when engaging with the nuanced aspects of musical com-
position that are often intrinsic to human-created music.
These limitations delineate areas for potential enhance-
ment and further research:
Subtlety in Musical Expression: The system is adept
at interpreting basic musical elements but faces chal-
lenges in generating compositions with the nuanced sub-
tlety characteristic of human composers. This includes
aspects such as emotional depth, dynamic contrasts, and
intricate phrasing, which are essential for conveying more
profound musical narratives and experiences.
Translation from Natural Language to Musical No-
tation: Instructions and feedback given by the Group
Leader and Review Agent aiming to facilitate nuanced
musical elements are sometimes inadequately translated
into ABC notations by the musician agents. This gap
between conceptual understanding and practical embod-
iment in music notation underscores the system’s current
limitations in realizing more sophisticated musical ideas.
Instrumental Note Range Compliance: The sys-
tem occasionally generates notes beyond the conventional
pitch ranges of certain instruments. For example, despite
directives to adhere to instrument-specific pitch ranges,
outputs have included notes exceeding the upper limit of
a contrabass (C2 to F4), reflecting a discrepancy between
the system’s outputs and practical musical performance
constraints.
Inter-Voice Alignment: Our system faces challenges
with aligning multiple musical voices accurately. This
challenge primarily arises from the inherent limitations
of text-based LLMs in generating polyphonic ABC no-
tations. The linear nature of text-based input and output
mechanisms does not naturally accommodate the com-
plexity of polyphonic music, where multiple voices or in-
struments must be coordinated in time.
Cadential Resolution: Certain compositions gener-
ated by the system appear to lack a conclusive sense of
resolution, resulting in pieces that may feel unfinished or
conclude abruptly. This issue affects the listener’s sense
of closure and satisfaction, detracting from the overall ef-
fectiveness of the musical experience. The challenge in
achieving cadential resolution is partly due to the inherent
difficulty for GPTs to grasp the concept of musical clo-
sure, which the perpetual aspect of its nature is hard for a
language model to handle.

--- Page 9 ---
5. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, our investigation into ComposerX, a multi-
agent polyphonic symbolic music composition system, re-
veals its efficacy in leveraging the inherent musical capa-
bilities of LLMs to compose high-quality music. By intro-
ducing a collaborative agent-based approach, ComposerX
not only transcends the capabilities of single-agent sys-
tems but also offers a cost-effective alternative to tradi-
tional music generation models that rely heavily on com-
putational resources.
6. CONTRIBUTIONS AND
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Core
Qixin Deng, qdeng4@u.rochester.edu
Qikai Yang, qikaiy2@illinois.edu
Ruibin Yuan, ryuanab@connect.ust.hk
Yipeng Huang, hyp744009246@163.com
Contributors
Yi Wang
Xubo Liu
Zeyue Tian
Jiahao Pan
Ge Zhang
Hanfeng Lin
Yizhi Li
Yinghao Ma
Jie Fu
Chenghua Lin
Emmanouil Benetos
Wenwu Wang
Gus Xia
Correspondence
Wei Xue, weixue@ust.hk
Yike Guo, yikeguo@ust.hk
7. REFERENCES
[1] N. Masataka, “The origins of language and the evolu-
tion of music: A comparative perspective,” Physics of
Life Reviews , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 11–22, 2009.
[2] ——, “Music, evolution and language,” Developmen-
tal science , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 35–39, 2007.
[3] M. C. Pino, M. Giancola, and S. D’Amico, “The as-
sociation between music and language in children: A
state-of-the-art review,” Children , vol. 10, no. 5, p.
801, 2023.
[4] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit,
L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin,
“Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[5] C.-Z. A. Huang, A. Vaswani, J. Uszkoreit, N. Shazeer,
I. Simon, C. Hawthorne, A. M. Dai, M. D. Hoffman,M. Dinculescu, and D. Eck, “Music transformer,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.04281 , 2018.
[6] C. Payne, “Musenet,” OpenAI Blog, Apr 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://openai.com/blog/musenet
[7] P. Lu, X. Xu, C. Kang, B. Yu, C. Xing, X. Tan, and
J. Bian, “Musecoco: Generating symbolic music from
text,” 2023.
[8] P. Dhariwal, H. Jun, C. Payne, J. W. Kim, A. Radford,
and I. Sutskever, “Jukebox: A generative model for
music,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00341 , 2020.
[9] A. Agostinelli, T. I. Denk, Z. Borsos, J. Engel,
M. Verzetti, A. Caillon, Q. Huang, A. Jansen,
A. Roberts, M. Tagliasacchi et al. , “Musiclm:
Generating music from text,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.11325 , 2023.
[10] J. Copet, F. Kreuk, I. Gat, T. Remez, D. Kant,
G. Synnaeve, Y . Adi, and A. Défossez, “Simple
and controllable music generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.05284 , 2023.
[11] E. H. Margulis and R. Simchy-Gross, “Repetition
enhances the musicality of randomly generated tone
sequences,” Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary
Journal , vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 509–514, 2016.
[12] S. Dai, H. Yu, and R. B. Dannenberg, “What is miss-
ing in deep music generation? a study of repeti-
tion and structure in popular music,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.00182 , 2022.
[13] H. Jhamtani and T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, “Modeling self-
repetition in music generation using generative adver-
sarial networks,” in Machine Learning for Music Dis-
covery Workshop, ICML , 2019.
[14] X. Qu, Y . Bai, Y . Ma, Z. Zhou, K. M. Lo, J. Liu,
R. Yuan, L. Min, X. Liu, T. Zhang et al. , “Mupt:
A generative symbolic music pretrained transformer,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06393 , 2024.
[15] X. Yue, X. Qu, G. Zhang, Y . Fu, W. Huang, H. Sun,
Y . Su, and W. Chen, “Mammoth: Building math
generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05653 , 2023.
[16] B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat,
X. E. Tan, Y . Adi, J. Liu, T. Remez, J. Rapin et al. ,
“Code llama: Open foundation models for code,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 , 2023.
[17] S. Bubeck, V . Chandrasekaran, R. Eldan, J. Gehrke,
E. Horvitz, E. Kamar, P. Lee, Y . T. Lee, Y . Li,
S. Lundberg et al. , “Sparks of artificial general intelli-
gence: Early experiments with gpt-4,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.12712 , 2023.
[18] L. Lin, G. Xia, Y . Zhang, and J. Jiang, “Arrange,
inpaint, and refine: Steerable long-term music au-
dio generation and editing via content-based controls,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09508 , 2024.

--- Page 10 ---
[19] L. Lin, G. Xia, J. Jiang, and Y . Zhang, “Content-based
controls for music large language modeling,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.17162 , 2023.
[20] ——, “Equipping musicgen with chord and rhythm
controls,” in Ismir 2023 Hybrid Conference , 2023.
[21] R. Yuan, H. Lin, Y . Wang, Z. Tian, S. Wu, T. Shen,
G. Zhang, Y . Wu, C. Liu, Z. Zhou, Z. Ma, L. Xue,
Z. Wang, Q. Liu, T. Zheng, Y . Li, Y . Ma, Y . Liang,
X. Chi, R. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Li, J. Wu, C. Lin, Q. Liu,
T. Jiang, W. Huang, W. Chen, E. Benetos, J. Fu,
G. Xia, R. Dannenberg, W. Xue, S. Kang, and Y . Guo,
“Chatmusician: Understanding and generating music
intrinsically with llm,” 2024.
[22] S. Ding, Z. Liu, X. Dong, P. Zhang, R. Qian, C. He,
D. Lin, and J. Wang, “Songcomposer: A large lan-
guage model for lyric and melody composition in song
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17645 , 2024.
[23] X. Liang, J. Lin, and X. Du, “Bytecomposer:
a human-like melody composition method
based on language model agent,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.17785 , 2024.
[24] S. Wu and M. Sun, “Exploring the efficacy of pre-
trained checkpoints in text-to-music generation task,”
2023.
[25] Y . Zhang, A. Maezawa, G. Xia, K. Yamamoto, and
S. Dixon, “Loop copilot: Conducting ai ensembles for
music generation and iterative editing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.12404 , 2023.
[26] D. Yu, K. Song, P. Lu, T. He, X. Tan, W. Ye, S. Zhang,
and J. Bian, “Musicagent: An ai agent for music un-
derstanding and generation with large language mod-
els,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11954 , 2023.
[27] Y . Wang, Y . Kordi, S. Mishra, A. Liu, N. A. Smith,
D. Khashabi, and H. Hajishirzi, “Self-instruct: Align-
ing language models with self-generated instructions,”
2023.
[28] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma,
B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-
of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large lan-
guage models,” 2023.
[29] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y . Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu,
L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah,
R. W. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang, “Autogen: En-
abling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent con-
versation,” 2023.
[30] C. Donahue, A. Caillon, A. Roberts, E. Manilow,
P. Esling, A. Agostinelli, M. Verzetti, I. Simon,
O. Pietquin, N. Zeghidour et al. , “Singsong: Gener-
ating musical accompaniments from singing,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.12662 , 2023.

