--- Page 1 ---
.
.
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2071396.2071404
.
.
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
Towards an automatic music arrangement framework using score
reduction
JIUNLONG HUANG, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
.
SHIHCHUAN CHIU, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
.
MAN-KWAN SHAN, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan
.
.
.
Open Access Support provided by:
.
National Chengchi University
.
National Chiao Tung University
.
PDF Download
2071396.2071404.pdf
23 December 2025
Total Citations: 6
Total Downloads: 506
.
.Published: 03 February 2012
Accepted: 01 November 2010
Revised: 01 November 2010
Received: 01 June 2010
.
.
Citation in BibTeX format
.
.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM), Volume 8, Issue 1 (January 2012)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/2071396.2071404
EISSN: 1551-6865
.


--- Page 2 ---
8Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework
Using Score Reduction
JIUN-LONG HUANG and SHIH-CHUAN CHIU , National Chiao Tung University
MAN-KWAN SHAN , National Chengchi University
Score reduction is a process that arranges music for a target instrument by reducing original music. In this study we present a
music arrangement framework that uses score reduction to automatically arrange music for a target instrument. The original
music is ﬁrst analyzed to determine the type of arrangement element of each section, then the phrases are identiﬁed andeach is assigned a utility according to its type of arrangement element. For a set of utility-assigned phrases, we transform themusic arrangement into an optimization problem and propose a phrase selection algorithm. The music is arranged by selectingappropriate phrases satisfying the playability constraints of a target instrument. Using the proposed framework, we implementa music arrangement system for the piano. An approach similar to Turing test is used to evaluate the quality of the musicarranged by our system. The experiment results show that our system is able to create viable music for the piano.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.5 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ]: Sound and Music Computing—
Methodologies and techniques, modeling, systems ;J . 5[ Computer Application ]: Arts and Humanities— Fine arts, Performing
arts
General Terms: Theory
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Score reduction, automatic music arrangement, piano reduction, phrase selection
ACM Reference Format:
Huang, J.-L., Chiu, S.-C., and Shan, M.-K. 2012. Towards an automatic music arrangement framework using score reduction.
ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl. 8, 1, Article 8 (January 2012), 23 pages.DOI=10.1145/2071396.2071404 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2071396.2071404
1. INTRODUCTION
“Over the Rainbow,” a classical ballad, has remained popular since 1939. As of now, there are more
than 100 versions of this song, interpreted by numerous artists using different organizations of instru-
ments in various styles. For example, Jason Castro sang it in reggae style, accompanied by a ukulele;
jazz artists, Tommy Emmanuel used his guitar; and Robert Kyle played a monophonic tenor sax. Whena song is to be performed by an instrument or an ensemble, a process called music arrangement or
Authors’ addresses: J.-L. Huang (corresponding author), Department of Computer Science, National Chiao Tung University,
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan, ROC; email: jlhuang@cs.nctu.edu.tw; S.-C. Chiu, Department of Computer Science, National Chiao TungUniversity, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan, ROC; M.-K. Shan, Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taipei116, Taiwan, ROC.Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee providedthat copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the ﬁrst pageor initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmust be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute tolists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Permissions may berequested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212) 869-0481,
or permissions@acm.org.
c/circlecopyrt2012 ACM 1551-6857/2012/01-ART8 $10.00
DOI 10.1145/2071396.2071404 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2071396.2071404
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 3 ---
8:2 • J.-L. Huang et al.
transcription is necessary to adapt the song for the target instrument(s) [Corozine 2002]. Music ar-
rangement gives existing melodies more variety.
In the music industry, there are many applications of music arrangement. For example, although
the average mobile phone now doubles as music player, the function of the customized ringtone still
appeals to people. Music arrangement transforms the original music object into various styles. Thereis another issue regarding mobile phones: the problem of transcoding from MIDI to SP-MIDI (speciﬁc
polyphonic MIDI) [Lui et al. 2006]. Due to hardware limitations, most mobile phones support only SP-
MIDI. The polyphony has to be reduced and its impact on the music, minimized. Music arrangement
that reduces multipart instruments can achieve the same goal. However, the process of extracting the
essential part from the original music is always time-consuming for the arranger. Besides, not everymusic arranger is familiar with the properties of the particular instrument. Thus, we believe that
automatic music arrangement is needed to address the stated problems.
Generally, there are two major approaches to arranging music. One is rewriting a piece of existing
music with additional material. Instead of adding new material, the other one is score reduction that
arrangers reduces the original work from a larger score to a smaller score. That is, the arranger does
not create new counterpoints, harmonies, bass lines, and voices, but focuses only on eliminating theless important parts of the original score for application to the target instrument and keeps the ar-
ranged version similar to the original. In this paper, we concentrate on score reduction for two reasons.
First, score reduction allows a musician to perform a musical piece using the instrument with whichhe/she is familiar. Second, less prior studies on the literature focus on how to automatically create an
instrument-playable arrangement.
When arranging a piece of music for a target instrument, it is necessary to take into consideration
the characteristics and the inherent restrictions of the target instrument, such as pitch range and
polyphonic limitation. Hence, the goal is to include as many parts of the original music as possible
within the constraint of the target instrument so that the arranged version is similar to the original.
Piano reduction speciﬁcally refers to a two-line staff of a basic component reduced from multipart
music for a piano. Many famous piano reductions include the Bach transcriptions of Concerto fromvarious composers (bwv 972-987), Wagner/Liszt Tannh ¨auser, the Sullivan transcriptions of Concerto
Violoncello and orchestra, and Sheherazade Op. 35 of Nikolai Andreyevich Rimsky-Korsakov [Rimsky-
Korsakov 1888].
In addition, the role of an instrument varies in the different organizations of an ensemble. For ex-
ample, in a big band, the guitar may play accompaniment; however, for a solo, it may perform melody
and accompaniment simultaneously. The arrangement for the different roles of an instrument needsto be considered. To achieve this, we apply in this paper the concept of arrangement elements to take
into account the different roles of an instrument. The type of arrangement element of a piece of music
presents the function performed by an instrument in the piece of music. According to Owsinski [1999],there are ﬁve types of arrangement elements: lead ,foundation ,rhythm ,pad,a n d ﬁll. Interested reader
can refer to Section 2.1 for more discussions about the arrangement elements.
In this article, we propose a framework that arranges a piece of music by reducing the multipart
score for a given instrument. The main characteristic of the framework is that the various roles of
the target instrument in an ensemble can be speciﬁed by users. Given an original score (multipart)
and the role of the target instrument (proportion of the ﬁve types of arrangement elements), the pro-
posed framework will generate a playable arrangement for the target instrument according to the role
user speciﬁed. The framework consists of four phases (see Figure 1). Figure 2 presents an exampleof the change in musical content during the framework’s arrangement process. Because the arrange-
ment elements of some instruments may vary in different sections, the music object is ﬁrst divided
into several segments called segmented tracks intrack segmentation phase. Next, in the arrangement
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 4 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:3
Track
Segmenta/g415onArrangement 
Element 
Determina/g415onPhrase Iden/g415ﬁca/g415on & 
U/g415lity AssignmentPhrase 
Selec/g415onOriginal
musicNew arranged
music
Music  databaseTraining data
Oﬄine TrainingTrack
Segmenta/g415onﬁlterExpert
Annota/g415onPlayability
Veriﬁca/g415on
Fig. 1. The ﬂowchart of the proposed music arrangement framework.
Lead
Pad
Founda/g415onLead
Pad
Founda/g415on Founda/g415onLead
Arrangement 
Element
DeterminationPhrase 
Identification 
& Utility 
AssignmentPhrase
Selection
Original
musicNew
arranged 
music
Segmented
tracksClassified
segmented
tracksScored
phrasesSelected
phrases
Utility
...
Track
Segmentation
Fig. 2. An example process of the proposed music arrangement framework.
element determination phase, a classiﬁer is used to determine the type of arrangement element of
each segmented track. The classiﬁer is trained ofﬂine by expert-annotated segmented tracks. In thephrase identiﬁcation and utility assignment phase, the phrases in a segmented track are identiﬁed,
and the utility is assigned for each identiﬁed phrase according to the type of arrangement element of
the segmented track. In the playability veriﬁcation phase, a playability veriﬁcation function is used
to determine whether the given piece of music can be played by the target instrument. Finally, in the
phrase selection phase, the phrases are selected according to their utility and playability. The new ar-
ranged music is formed by these selected phrases. Based on the proposed framework, we implement a
music arrangement system for the piano. Several experiments are conducted to evaluate the system.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a preliminary of the arrange-
ment elements and a brief survey of related work. Section 3 gives an introduction of each component
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 5 ---
8:4 • J.-L. Huang et al.
of the proposed framework. The experimental results are given in Section 4 while Section 5 concludes
this article.
2. PRELIMINARY
2.1 Arrangement ElementInThe Mixing Engineer’s Handbook , Owsinski proposed a taxonomy, the so-called arrangement ele-
ments, for the function of a piece of music performed by an instrument [Owsinski 1999]. Analyzing the
arrangement elements will help musicians understand the structure of the arrangement so that they
can do further processes on the music, such as arranging, mixing, etc. According to Owsinski [1999],there are ﬁve types of arrangement elements: lead ,foundation ,rhythm ,pad,a n d ﬁll.
—Lead the melody and its counterpoint. The melody is the clearest part of music that people usually
remember and hum. The lead is usually demonstrated by a lead vocal or solo instrument.
—Foundation the main rhythm in music. It is always a regular pattern played by a drum (especially
bass drum and snare) or bass instrument.
—Rhythm broken bits counted to the foundation played by any instrument. It is more complicated in
beat and used to increase music ﬂuency.
—Pad consists of a long sustaining note or chord. Hence, it is usually played by a string instrument,
organ, or synthesizer. Generally, the pad can also denote those sounds which create ambiance.
—Fill usually appears in the spaces between the lead lines to ﬁll up the silence between successive
phrases of lead . It is similar to conversation: If the lead is a call, the ﬁllwould be a response.
These ﬁve elements can be viewed as the ingredients of an arrangement. The role of an instrument can
be referred to as an arrangement element or a mixture of them. In this paper, “role” and “arrangement
element” are used interchangeably.
A passage played by an instrument can be considered to have the property of one or more arrange-
ment elements. Roughly speaking, in an arrangement, the instrument is played for presenting the role
of melody or accompaniment, or both of them for a solo. If it presents a melody, the proportion of the
lead is especially higher than the others. If it presents accompaniment, the situation is reversed. For
a solo with melody and accompaniment, the distribution is more uniform. In depth, beyond two roughroles, the subtle role can also be described on the distribution over these ﬁve elements. For example,
when many instruments play accompaniment in music, some focusing on pad and some on rhythm ,
these subtle roles of the different distributions can be showed. By understanding the arrangementelements of music passages, it will be useful to arrange for the various roles of an instrument in music.
2.2 Related Work
Many works related to music arrangement focus on how to transform original music by changing
metainformation (tempo, timbre, etc.) or content (insert note, change pitch, re-assemble music seg-
ments, etc.) [Miranda 2001]. Nagashima and Kawashima [1997] employed chaotic neural networks to
create variations on melodies. The examples of the variations of an original music object are sent totrain chaotic neural networks. The networks model the characteristics of the variations and make a
new variation of the original music. Berndt et al. [2006] presented the strategies to synchronize and
adopt the game music with player interaction behaviors. The approach to arrange music in the context
of the interaction of applications is to vary the rhythmic, harmonic, and melodic elements of the basic
theme. Chung [2006] proposed a real-time music-arranging system that reacts to the affective cuesfrom a listener. The system re-assembles a set of music segments according to the inferred affective
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 6 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:5
state of a listener. Based on a probabilistic state transition model, the target affective state can also be
induced.
As to the reduction technique of score reduction for an instrument, piano reduction is one of the
important terms particularly referred to a two-line staff of piano reduced from multipart music. Finale,
a commercial software for music notation,1provides a plug-in tool: piano reduction that combines a
previously-prepared score into a two-line staff separated by a user-deﬁned pitch value. However, due
to the direct combination of notes in the score without selection, the part of produced score may be
difﬁcult or even impossible to play. Finale’s tool just provides a platform on which arrangers can do
further piano reduction. Since the research on guitar ﬁngering became mature [Tuohy and Potter
2006], Daniel and Potter [2006] presented an approach for guitar arrangement. The main concept isto choose a set of important notes by a search algorithm, with the constraint on the playability of the
guitar. However, this approach is dedicated to a solo guitar and cannot arrange for various roles in
music. In addition, we argue that if the chosen notes came from different instruments, it may result inthe loss of musical meaning, such as the completeness of a piece of melody.
3. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
3.1 Track Segmentation PhaseIn different sections, a track performed by an instrument may belong to different types of arrangement
elements. For example, a violin demonstrating pad arrangement element changes to lead in the violin
solo section. Hence, the track is segmented into segmented tracks . A segmented track is deﬁned as
a period of an instrument’s performance in which no arrangement element changes. Here we do notanalyze musical sections; instead, we want to ensure that no arrangement element changes in a seg-
mented track. Since the multipart music usually possesses a more complete arrangement structure,
we apply this beneﬁt in solving the problem. In other words, a time point, where many instruments
stop and others start, has a high possibility of becoming a cut point to separate two adjacent segmented
tracks. According to this heuristic, we deﬁne the similarity function between consecutive measures asfollows.
Sim
i,i+1=1−/parenleftBigg/summationtext
t∈Track/vextendsingle/vextendsingleNSBM i,t−NSBM i+1,t/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
NumTrack ×BeatPerMeasure/parenrightBigg
, (1)
where NSBM i,tis the number of nonsilence beats in measure iat track t,NumTrack is the number of
tracks, and BeatPerMeasure is beats per measure.
The similarity function compares the track in measure ito the track in measure ( i+1), then aggre-
gates diversities of all tracks with normalization. Being subtracted by 1, the difference is transformed
into similarity. We deﬁne a threshold value τto determine cut points. If Sim i,i+1is less than τ,t h e n
this is a cut point between measures iand i+1. When τis set to 0.5, Sim i,i+1<τ, it means that there
must be at least a half number of instruments switched.
3.2 Arrangement Element Determination Phase
Here we try to determine the type of the arrangement element of each segmented track. According to
the descriptions of the arrangement elements in Section 2.1, some arrangement elements share similar
properties. It is hard to determine the type of the arrangement element by heuristic rules. Hence wetreat the problem of arrangement element determination as a classiﬁcation problem. In other words,
each segmented track is classiﬁed into ﬁve classes (i.e., foundation ,rhythm ,pad,lead ,a n d ﬁll).
1http://www.ﬁnalemusic.com.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 7 ---
8:6 • J.-L. Huang et al.
Table I. Features for the Classiﬁer
Parameter Type Description
AvgPitch G Average pitch in the segmented track
AvgDuration G Average duration in the segmented track
DevPitch G Pitch deviation in the segmented track
IsPercussionChannel G Is Percussion Channel (usually channel 10)
PolyphonicRate G Proportion of note occurring in the same time
SilentRate G Proportion of silent in the segmented track
AvgPitchRank L Rank of average pitch in parallel segmented track
AvgDurationRank L Rank of average duration in parallel segmented track
IsHighestPitchPart L Is the segmented track with the highest average pitch in
parallel segmented tracks
IsLowestPitchPart L Is the segmented track with the lowest average pitch inparallel segmented tracks
G: global feature, L: local feature.
One of the important steps of classiﬁcation is to decide which features are used to represent the
segmented track. These features of a segmented track are capable of discriminating its class from the
others. Most of previous studies on music classiﬁcation focus on music style; to the best of our knowl-
edge, there is no study in the literature about the automatic classiﬁcation of arrangement elements.
According to the descriptions of the arrangement elements in [Owsinski 1999], we summarize their
characteristics and choose the features accordingly. The properties of an instrument exert a heavy in-
ﬂuence on the arrangement element; for example, pizzicato instruments (such as harp, ukulele, etc)
cannot be pad. The arrangement element of a segmented track highly depends on the others in this mu-
sic, especially parallel ones. Thus, we choose both global feature (common features) and local features
(related to the other segmented track). The detailed features that we extracted and their descriptions
are listed in Table I.
The classiﬁer is trained using manual tagged data for each segmented track, that is, a segmented
track is marked as one of ﬁve types of arrangement elements according to its features. During the
determination process, each segmented track in the given music is fed into the classiﬁer to determinethe type of arrangement element. The probability distribution over ﬁve types of arrangement element
is obtained in our framework for the later phase.
3.3 Phrase Identiﬁcation and Utility Assignment Phase
3.3.1 Phrase Identiﬁcation. In this section, we attempt to identify the phrases from a segmented
track. As mentioned in Stein [1979], the deﬁnition of “phrase” is ambiguous. The phrase we try to ﬁnd
is a monophonic melodic group of notes with similar properties, usually separated by a breathe pointor a large pitch interval. Many approaches have been proposed, which have performed well in ﬁnding
this type of phrases. Because the phrases are found from a monophonic piece of music, we ﬁrst have to
identify the monophonic piece lines from a segmented track. Thus, the process of phrase identiﬁcationconsists of two steps: (1) ﬁnding monophonic lines; and (2) identifying phrases from monophonic lines.
In the ﬁrst step, we adopt the approach proposed in Lui et al. [2006] because, to the best of our
knowledge, no other studies on this topic have investigated so far. One of the most important issuesof ﬁnding the monophonic line in polyphonic music is to preserve the best voice leading, which keeps
the most natural melodic continuity between notes. The notes are grouped as follows: First, the chord
progress of each measure is determined. For each consecutive pair of chords, let C
fewerbe the chord
with fewer notes and Cmor e be the chord with more notes. Resolve each tendency tone, and then each
note of Cfeweris grouped with its neighbor of the nearest pitch in Cmor e. For different chords, the notes
are grouped based on the following.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 8 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:7
—For common chords, such as I and V, use voice-leading matrixes to resolve tendency notes.
—For the other chords, group each note of the preceding chord with its nearest neighbor in the suc-
ceeding chord.
The voice-leading matrix is two-dimensional (12 ×12). The indices are relative to the tonic and the
entry indicates the voice leading priority from pitch row to pitch column. Interested readers can referto Lui et al. [2006] for the detailed descriptions.
In the ﬁrst step, the monophonic lines are extracted. In the second step, the phrases are identiﬁed
in each monophonic line. We investigated many works on this issue, and chose, the local boundary de-
tection model (LBDM) [Cambouropoulos 2001] due to its easy implementation and good performance.
The approach identiﬁes phrases by segmenting a monophonic line according to larger pitch intervalsor breaths of long notes. This model consists of a change rule, which assigns boundary strengths in
proportion to the degree of change between consecutive intervals, and a proximity rule, which scales
the boundary strength according to the size of the intervals involved. The LBDM performs over threeindependent parametric melodic proﬁles Proﬁle
k=[x1,x2,..., xn] where k{pitch ,ioi,rest},i{1, 2,...,
n}and ioistands for inter-onset interval. The boundary strength at interval xiis deﬁned by
strength i=xi×(ri−1,i+ri,i+1), (2)
where ri−1,iis the degree of change between two successive intervals and can be calculated by
ri,i+1=/braceleftBigg|xi−xi+1|
xi+xi+1if x i+xi+1/negationslash=0∧xi+xi+1≥0
0 if x i=xi+1=0.(3)
For each parameter k, the boundary strength proﬁle strength iis calculated and normalized into the
range [0, 1]. A weighted sum of strengths is computed, using weights derived by trial-and-error in
Cambouropoulos [2001] (0.25 for pitch and rest, and 0.5 for ioi). Finally, the boundaries are detected
where the combined strength proﬁle exceeds a predeﬁned threshold.
3.3.2 Utility Assignment. Each of phrases identiﬁed is of different importance for the arrangement.
We deﬁne the importance of a phrase, called utility , based on two factors. In the ﬁrst factor, we con-
sider the types of arrangement elements of the phrase for the target instrument that users considered.As mentioned in Section 3.2, the ﬁve types of arrangement elements in a segmented track have been
determined and the classiﬁer outputs the probabilities. Considering the input of our framework, the
types of arrangement elements that users want to arrange for the target instrument have been speci-ﬁed in advance. The probabilities of the user-deﬁned types of arrangement elements are taken as the
ﬁrst part of utility. Hence, the probabilities that the phrase inherited from the segmented track to
which it belongs are summed up. To normalize the value, it is divided by the number of the considered
types. The ﬁrst factor, denoted as F
1(phr st,i), can be formulated as
F1(phr st,i)=ae/summationdisplay
P(ae|st)×ϕae/slashBig ae/summationdisplay
ϕae, (4)
where phr st,iis the i-th phrase in segmented track st;ae{Foundation ,Rhythm ,Pad,Lead ,Fill};
P(ae|st) is the probability that the segment track stbelongs to arrangement element ae;φaeis the
user preference on arrangement element aeandφae(0, 1]. For example, if we consider the arrange-
ment elements, lead and ﬁll, are important, we can set φleadandφfil lto 1 and set the others close to 0.
Note that for all phrases in the same segmented track, their F1values are equal.
In the second factor, the richness of a phrase is considered because we think it will make newly
arranged music richer. The entropy is used to measure the richness of a phrase; that is, the phrase is
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 9 ---
8:8 • J.-L. Huang et al.
richer when the pitches of the phrase are represented by more bits. The second factor, F2(phr st,i), is
deﬁned with the formula
F2(phr st,i)=normalize/parenleftBigg
−m/summationdisplay
i=1pvilog 2(pvi)/parenrightBigg
, (5)
where mis the number of distinct pitch values in the phrase phr st,iand pviis the proportion of a pitch
value in a phrase.
Note that an upper bound for entropy is deﬁned and the entropy can be normalized into 0 ∼1. Here,
the upper bound of the entropy is set to 64 heuristically, since a phrase usually falls within two mea-
sures and there are 16 distinct pitches at most for the notes with the 1/8 minimal length of a note in4/4 music.
We combine the values of these two factors as the utility of a phrase with predeﬁned weights. Since
the phrases needed to be selected on score and some constraints exist among phrases over the timedomain, the range of value leads into a situation wherein most of selected phrases are shorter. To
assign the utility fairly over the time domain, the length of the phrase is also considered. Therefore,
the utility of a phrase is deﬁned as
Utility (phr
st,i)=(α1F1+α2F2)×Length (phr st,i), (6)
where α1,α2[0, 1]; α1+α2=1; and Length (phr st,i) is the length of phrase phr st,i.
3.4 Phrase Selection Phase
3.4.1 Phrase Selection Problem. After preparing the phrases with utilities, in the last phase of our
framework, the phrases are selected under some conditions. Such selection is called the phrase selec-tion problem and the formal deﬁnition of the phrase selection problem is as follows. For an arbitrary
phrase p, its start position, end position, and utility over each arrangement element are denoted by
p.start ,p.end ,a n d p.utility , respectively. MOP is an integer that denotes the maximal number of over-
lapping phrases, allowed by an instrument, simultaneously. Then, the phrase selection problem can be
deﬁned as below.
Deﬁnition 1(Phrase selection problem) . Given a set of phrases, denoted as PSet ={p
1,p2,..., pn}and
an integer MOP , the phrase selection problem is to ﬁnd a set SP⊆PSet such that:
(1) the summation of the utilities of phrases in SPis maximal and
(2)SPsatisﬁes the constraints of MOP and playability.
The phrase selection problem is similar to the k-track assignment problem , which has been proved
to be NP-hard, in the traditional job scheduling area [Brucker and Nordmann 1994]. The k-track as-
signment problem is a scheduling problem, in which a collection of jobs with start and end times is to
be processed by k machines. Two different jobs can be processed by the same machine only when thejobs do not overlap. If the constraint of playability is omitted, the phrase selection problem will de-
generate to the k-track assignment problem where k is equal to MOP . That is, the k-track assignment
problem is a special case of the phrase selection problem. In addition to considering the constraint ofthe number of overlapping phrases (i.e., MOP ), the phrase selection problem also needs to consider the
playability of the selected phrases on the target instrument. Thus, we believe that the phrase selection
problem is more complex than the k-track assignment problem.
An a ¨ıve approach to solving the phrase selection problem is to integrate playability veriﬁcation in
to the algorithm [Brucker and Nordmann 1994] for the k-track assignment problem. Unfortunately, itis difﬁcult to perform such integration since the algorithm proposed in Brucker and Nordmann [1994]
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 10 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:9
is optimized for the k-track assignment problem. Let’s consider another problem, the exon chaining
problem [Jones and Pevzner 2004], which is a special case of the k-track assignment problem withk=1. Due to the simplicity of the algorithm proposed in Jones and Pevzner [2004], we can extend
such algorithm to consider playability veriﬁcation and the scenarios with k >1 simultaneously. For
better readability, the descriptions and the design principle of playability veriﬁcation are given inSection 3.4.2, while the proposed phrase selection algorithm is described in Section 3.4.3.
3.4.2 Playability Veriﬁcation. In our proposed framework, we use the playability function to verify
whether a piece of music can be performed by the instrument. The input of the playability function
of an instrument is a piece of music and the output is a Boolean value indicating whether the musicis playable by the instrument or not. Speciﬁcally speaking, the input is a set of phrases where the
overlaps among the phrases may exist. The output value of a playability function can be determined
by rules or sophisticate logic. We suggest some necessary considerations in designing a playabilityfunction as follows.
Playability Function Design Principle. To design the playability function of an instrument, two types
of limitations have to be considered: instrumental and physical limitations. In instrumental limitation,
we list some constraints here.
—Pitch range . Pitch range is an important limitation for most instruments. For example, the pitch
range of the piano is from the A three octaves below middle C to the C four octaves above middle C(if middle C is C4, it is A0 ∼C8) [White 1992]. The pitch range of a C ﬂute is B3 ∼C7.
—Duration constraint . Some instruments cannot sound sustain note, such as vibraphone. Physical
limitations are caused by hands or bodies of the people who play the instrument. We also list some
constraints as follows.
—Number of polyphony . Number of polyphony of an instrument is the maximal number of notes that
the instrument can sound simultaneously. For example, people play the piano by right hands, so that
at most, ﬁve notes can be played at the same time.
—Physical pitch range constraint . These constraints are caused by hand. The notes in the selected
phrases are restricted by the expansion of the ﬁngers.
—Overlapping note constraint . Some combinations of overlapping notes cannot be played. For example,
B, C and C# cannot be played simultaneously by hand on the guitar.
Based on the design principle, we design in Appendix A a playability function for a right hand playing
piano. The playability function will also be used for the implementation of our piano arrangement
system in the experiments.
3.4.3 Phrase Selection Algorithm. The idea of the proposed phrase selection algorithm is to con-
sider each phrase incrementally to determine whether it can be selected or not. To select a phrase, twoconditions should be satisﬁed: (1) the phrase is playable with the previous selected phrases; (2) the
phrase is worth to be selected. While checking whether a phrase is worth to be selected, we examine
the inﬂuence of selecting the phrase on the previous selection. The whole problem can be divided intoseveral small subproblems. Thus, the phrase selection algorithm is designed in a divide-and-conquer
manner.
Algorithm Overview. The details of the proposed phrase selection algorithm are shown in Figure 3.
In the initialization step (lines 1-3), the placement of all phrases is transformed by sorting their startand end positions. The transformation will not change the order of the start and end positions of
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 11 ---
8:10 • J.-L. Huang et al.
Fig. 3. Phrase selection algorithm.
phrases, and will still keep the overlap relationships between each pair of phrases.2There are 2 n
indices for all start and end indices of nphrases. After that, for each index i, the following three at-
tributes are extracted: g(i).phrase ,g(i).utility ,a n d g(i).startI . If index icorresponds to the end index of
a phrase, g(i).phrase is the corresponding phrase, g(i).utility is the utility of g(i).phrase and g(i).startI
is the start index of g(i).phrase . Otherwise, g(i).phrase ,g(i).utility ,a n d g(i).startI are null. A condi-
tional phrase list, CP List, is prepared to store a set of conditional phrases. Then, the main function,
Opt(0,0,2 n−1,MOP|{}), is called to compute the optimal selection Opt(0,0,2 n−1,MOP|{}).seland
the optimal utility Opt(0,0,2 n−1,MOP |{}).ut(the summation of the utilities of the selected phrases),
where MOP indicates the maximal number of the overlapping phrases allowed by the target instru-
ment. Finally, the proposed algorithm returns SPas the optimal selection. We deﬁne Opt as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.Opt(bv,si,ei,room |CP List) is a function to compute the optimal selection of the
phrases before index eiunder the constraints that 1. The maximal number of overlapping phrases
from index sito index eiisroom and 2. The phrases in CP List have been selected. The initial base
value bvis the utility of the optimal selection of the phrases seen atsi. A phrase is said to be seen at
index jif the end position of the phrase is smaller than or equal to j. That is, g(i).phrase is said to be
seen at index jifi≤j.
Function Opt. The most important part of the phrase selection algorithm is function Opt. To facil-
itate the following discussion, the utility of the selected phrases is deﬁned as the summation of the
utilities of these selected phrases. The objective of the function is to obtain the optimal selection and
the utility of the optimal selection. Function Opt is designed in a divide-and-conquer manner. That is,
2Interested readers can refer to Jones and Pevzner [2004] for the details of the transformation.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 12 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:11
g(i).phrase
i
Opt(ru,g(i).startI ,i,MOPʵ1|{g(i).phrase }).ut ru=Opt (0,0, g(i).startI ,i,MOP |{}).ut
Fig. 4. An illustration of CP List={ }.
the whole problem can be divided into several subproblems, recursively. The process of function Opt
is to sequentially check each phrase according to its end position in ascending order and determinewhether the checked phrase is selected or not.
A phrase is selected only when the following two conditions are satisﬁed. The ﬁrst condition is the
playable condition (line 4) that CP
List/uniontext{g(i).phrase }should be playable and there is enough space
for selecting g(i).phrase .N o t et h a t g(i).phrase cannot be null. The expression of the ﬁrst condition is
(g(i).phrase /negationslash=null and ( isPlayable (CP List/uniontext{g(i).phrase })=true and room >0). The other condition
is the worth condition (line 6) that the optimal utility of selecting g(i).phrase is worthier than not
selecting g(i).phrase . That is, w>Opt(bv,si,i−1,room |CP List), where the calculation of wwill be
described later. If the above two conditions are satisﬁed, g(i).phrase is selected. The optimal selection
Opt(bv,si,i,room |CP List).selis updated according to the optimal selection during computing w,
and the optimal utility Opt(bv,si,i,room |CP List).utis set to w. Otherwise, the optimal selection
and the utility of the optimal selection are inherited from the previous results, Opt(bv,si,i−1,room |
CP List).seland Opt(bv,si,i−1,room |CP List).ut, respectively.
CPList is Empty. We now consider that g(i).phrase is selected for computing w. Note that selecting a
new phrase may inﬂuence the optimal selection. That is, some phrases in the optimal selection may be
removed due to the selection of the new phrase. Let’s begin from the simple case that CP List is empty.
As shown in Figure 4, the inﬂuence region of selecting g(i).phrase is the region that g(i).phrase locates,
that is, from index g(i).startI toi. In addition, the maximal number of overlapping phrases allowed in
the inﬂuence region of selecting g(i).phrase would be decreased by one. The recursive function, Opt(ru,
g(i).startI ,i,MOP −1|{g(i).phrase }), is called to compute the optimal selection of the inﬂuence region
of selecting g(i).phrase when g(i).phrase is selected, where ruis the optimal utility before g(i).startI
(i.e., ru=Opt(0, 0, g(i).startI ,MOP |{}).ut). Thus, the utility of the optimal selection when g(i).phrase
is selected is w=Opt(ru,g(i).startI ,i,MOP −1|{g(i).phrase }).ut+g(i).utility . When the utility of the
optimal selection when g(i).phrase is selected is worthier than the utility without selecting g(i).phrase
(that is, w>Opt(bv,si,i−1,room |CP List).ut(line 6)), the optimal selection is updated and the
utility of the optimal selection is set to w. Otherwise, the optimal selection and the utility of the optimal
selection are inherited from the previous results.
CPList is not Empty. We now describe how to compute wwhen CP List is not empty. When a
phrase is selected with empty CP List,Opt is invoked in the inference region of g(i).phrase .A ss h o w n
in Figure 5, when CP List is not empty, many subregions with different values of room have to be
processed by function Opt. The formula of wshould be designed to deal with this situation. Note that,
for each phrase g(j).phrase inCP List,g(j).startI is smaller than i.L e t phrase nbe the number of
phrases in CP List/uniontext{g(i).phrase }. Without loss of generality, the phrases in CP List/uniontext{g(i).phrase }
are sorted by their start positions in ascending order and relabeled as {j1,j2,...,jphrase n}, where j1.startI
≤j2.startI ≤···≤ jphrase n.startI ≤i,a n d jk.startI is the start index of phrase jk. In the ﬁrst sub-region
from index 0 to j1.startI , the maximal number of overlapping phrases allowed is MOP . The utility of
the optimal selection of the ﬁrst sub-region, which is denoted as ru0,i sOpt(0,0, j1.startI ,MOP |{}).ut.
For the second sub-region from index j1.startI toj2.startI , the utility of the optimal selection of the ﬁrst
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 13 ---
8:12 • J.-L. Huang et al.
j1
g(i).phrasejphrase_nj2…
…sorted CP_List ∪{g(i).phrase } according to index of start posi/g415on
decreasing room caused by the phrases in CP_Listsub-region 1
(room=MOP )
Opt(Opt(0, 0, j1.startI,MOP ).ut,j1.startI ,j2.startI ,MOPʵ1).ut…
room=MOP phrase_nsub-region 2
(room=MOP 1)j1
j2
jphrase_n
Fig. 5. An illustration of CP List/negationslash={ }.
sub-region ru0is taken as the base value and the maximal number of overlapping phrases allowed is
MOP −1. Thus, Opt(ru0,j1.startI ,j2.startI ,MOP −1|{j1}) is called. For the third sub-region from
j2.startI toj3.startI under MOP −2, we take the optimal utility of the previous subregion as the base
value and calculate the optimal utility in this subregion by invoking function Opt in a similar manner.
This process repeats until the last sub-region from jphrase n.startI toiunder MOP −phrase nhas been
processed by function Opt. This recurrence relation is shown as follows.
Initial condition:
Opt(bv,si,si,room|CP List).ut=bv;
Recurrence relation:
Opt(bv,si,i,room|CP List).ut
=⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩w=Opt(Opt(...Opt(Opt(Opt(0,0,j
1.startI ,MOP |{}).ut,j1.startI ,j2.startI ,MOP −1|{j1}).ut,
j2.startI ,j3.startI ,MOP −2|{j1,j2}).ut,...).ut,
jpharse n.startI ,i−1,MOP −pharse n|{j1,j2,..., jpharse n}).ut
+g(i).utility ,
if (g(i)).pharse /negationslash=null)a n d( CP List∪{g(i).pharse }is playable) and ( room >0) (palyable) ,and
w> Opt(bv,si,i−1,room|CP List).ut(worth)
Opt(bv,si,i−1,room|CP List).ut,otherwise (7)
According to the above recurrence relation, we can notice that the functions with the same param-
eter (for example, Opt(0, 0, i,MOP |{}), where 1 ≤i≤2n−1) are used repetitively. For saving the
computation time, the result of the function with different parameters will be stored for reuse.
3.4.4 Correctness. The proposed phrase selection algorithm is designed to solve the phrase selec-
tion problem in a recursive manner by function Opt. We next show the correctness of the proposed
phrase selection algorithm by proving the optimality guarantee of function Opt.
LEMMA 1. Function Opt can always obtain the optimal selection.
We prove the correctness of function Opt by induction on the value of room .
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 14 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:13
…the phrases aﬀected by g(i).phrase
g(i).phrase…
Fig. 6. An illustration of the computation at the worst case.
Induction basis. Considering room =1 and no playability function, the phrase selection problem is
reduced to the exon-chaining or activity-selection problem. That is, no overlapping phrase is allowed
and the playability function always returns true. Our algorithm is extended from the exon-chaining
algorithm that the optimality has been proven in Jones and Pevzner [2004]. While the playabilityfunction is taken into consideration, there is no case that g(i).phrase is not playable with the phrases
inCP
List. It is because that the CP List is always empty when room =1 (that is, no overlapping
phrase exists). In addition, function Opt will not select g(i).phrase ifg(i).phrase itself is not playable.
Therefore, function Opt is able to obtain the optimal selection when room =1.
Induction hypothesis: The function Opt is able to obtain the optimal selection while room <MOP .
Suppose room =MOP . In function Opt,t h em a i n forloop examines whether the new-seen phrase,
g(i).phrase , should be selected or not. If g(i).phrase is not playable with the phrases in CP List, function
Opt will not select g(i).phrase .W h e n g(i).phrase is playable with recursive-called phrase list CP List,
function Opt will recursively invoke itself on all subregions with smaller values of room .S i n c et h e
value of room of each invocation of function Opt on each subregion is smaller than MOP , by induction
hypothesis, each invocation of function Opt on each sub-region is able to obtain the optimal selection.
According to Equation 7, we can conclude that function Opt is able to obtain the optimal selection when
room =MOP . As a result, we can prove the correctness of Lemma 1 by induction.
3.4.5 Time Complexity Analysis. The proposed phrase selection algorithm acts in a branch-and-
bound manner. Each phrase is chronologically examined whether it is selected. If a phrase is selected,
the optimal selection affected by this phrase is computed. Fortunately, this process will not expand allpossible changes, since the expansion process is bound at the point which the previous computation
has been stored (i.e., Opt(0,0, i,MOP |{}), where 1 ≤i≤2n−1). In the best case, there is no overlapping
phrase and function Opt examines each phrase at most once. Thus, the time complexity of the proposed
phrase selection algorithm is O( /Psi1×n), where nis the number of phrases and /Psi1is the time complexity
of playability function. In the worst case, all phrases are parallel as shown in Figure 6. That is, each
phrase overlaps with all other phrases. In the outermost invocation of function Opt, each phrase is
checked whether it worth to be selected. For the computation of the i
th-seen phrase, function Opt
recursively calls itself to examine the situation that g(i).phrase is selected. When no seen phrase is
overlapping with the ﬁrst-seen phrase, the inner Opt examines all possible selections and the number
of possible selections is C0
0=1. Similarly, when two phrases are seen overlapping with g(i).phrase ,t h e
number of all possible selections is C1
0+C1
1(the possible selections containing no phrase overlapping
with g(i).phrase plus the possible selections containing one phrase overlapping with g(i).phrase ).
Hence, the number of all possible selections when g(i).phrase is selected is Ci−1
0+Ci−1
1+···+ Ci−1
m−1=/summationtextm−1
j=0Ci−1
j, where mis the maximal number of overlapping phrases allowed. Note that the number
of all possible selections is bound by m−1 because, at most, m−1 phrases can be selected when
g(i).phrase is selected. Thus, the total number of possible selections for the outermost Opt isC0
0+
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 15 ---
8:14 • J.-L. Huang et al.
(C1
0+C1
1)+(C2
0+C2
1+C2
2)+···+ (Cn−1
0+Cn−1
1+···+ Cn−1
m−1)=/Phi1.A n d /Phi1=/summationtextm−1
j=0C0
j+/summationtextm−1
j=0C1
j+
···+/summationtextm−1
j=0Cn−1
j≤/summationtextm−1
j=0Cn−1
j/summationtextm−1
j=0Cn−1
j+···+/summationtextm−1
j=0Cn−1
j=(n−1)×(Cn−1
0+Cn−1
1+···+ Cn−1
m−1)≤
(n−1)×(Cn−1
m−1+Cn−1
m−1+···+ Cn−1
m−1)=(n−1)×m×Cn−1
m−1≤(n−1)×m×nm=O(mnm). Because
the playability function is performed when each phrase is selected, the time complexity of the phraseselection algorithm at the worst case is O( /Psi1mn
m). Fortunately, mis a small number in practice. That
is, the maximal number of overlapping phrases allowed by most instruments is a small constant. For
example, the maximal number of overlapping phrases for a violin is 4; for most wind instruments,one; for a piano, 10; and for a guitar, six. While mis a small constant, the time complexity of the
proposed phrase selection algorithm is polynomial time. Therefore, in practice, the execution time of
the proposed phrase selection algorithm is acceptable. Interested readers can also see Appendix D forthe execution time of the proposed algorithm on several real cases.
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our music arrangement system was implemented in Java, along with two open source packages,
jMusic [Sorensen and Brown 2000] and Weka [Witten and Frank 2005]. The library, jMusic, providesan environment for manipulating MIDI data; Weka provides machine learning tools for our training
and test process. We choose MIDI-format music as a source of symbolic data. All the music data we
collected are available on the Web page (http://mpc.cs.nctu.edu.tw/ ∼stevechiu/mas/mas
work/).
4.1 Effectiveness of Arrangement Element Determination
In implementing of the arrangement element determination, we chose the support vector machine
(SVM) [Boser et al. 1992] as our classiﬁer. The SVM is a supervised learning approach. Input data is
viewed as two sets of vectors in an n-dimensional space. In the space, the SVM constructs a separating
hyperplane which maximizes the margin between the two data sets. A good separation is achieved
while the hyperplane has the largest distance to the neighboring data points of both classes. After the
hyperplane is decided (training phase), the SVM model is able to answer or predict the class of a new
example.
The sequential minimal optimization algorithm is employed for training a support vector classiﬁer
using the polynomial kernel. There are ﬁve classes in the arrangement element determination prob-
lem. The multiclass result can be solved by using pairwise classiﬁcation; that is, the result is from
Cm
2binary classiﬁers. Besides, the probability that a segmented track belongs to each class is vital
information for our system. To obtain proper probabilities, logistic regression models are used to ﬁt
to the outputs of the support vector machine. In the multiclass case, Hastie and Tibshirani’s pairwise
coupling method [Hastie and Tibshrani 1998] is employed with the predicted probabilities. It will in-put test data (a segmented track) to the classiﬁer, then the probability distribution will be obtained as
important information for utility assignment.
We collected the segmented tracks by ﬁrst performing track segmentation on each music object in
our database. Two musically trained experts were then asked to annotate the type of arrangement
element for some of the segmented tracks. Both of them have received at least 15-year music training
and participate in music productions and recordings. Besides, one graduated from department of mu-sic and majored in composition and arranging. The other has ﬁve-year experience in computer music.
A total of 240 segmented tracks were annotated: 78 for foundation ,5 6f o r rhythm ,1 5f o r pad,6 7f o r
lead ,a n d2 4f o r ﬁll. The segmented tracks and their annotated result were also shown on the Web
page (http://mpc.cs.nctu.edu.tw/ ∼stevechiu/mas/mas
work/showdatabase.php). We trained our classi-
ﬁer with the unbalanced sizes of the class because the proportion of the types of arrangement elementsin a music object is also unbalanced. The parameters of SVM are set by trial and error (The values of
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 16 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:15
Table II. Confusion Matrix for Five
Arrangement Elements with Tenfold
Cross-Validation
Classiﬁer As
Arrangement Element fo rh pa le ﬁ
fo=Foundation 73 3 0 2 0
rh=Rhythm 7 45 0 3 1
pa=Pad 0 3 9 2 1
le=Lead 3 1 0 61 2
ﬁ=Fill 0 1 1 15 7
these parameters are listed in Table VI in Appendix C). The confusion matrix of classiﬁcation result
is shown in Table II. The f-measures for foundation ,rhythm ,pad,lead ,a n d ﬁllare 0.907, 0.826, 0.72,
0.813, and 0.4 respectively.
The class, ﬁll, cannot be determined very well. The properties of ﬁllare very similar to lead ,a s
they have common characteristics such as pitch, duration, etc. No relevant feature can be used todiscriminate them. This is reason ﬁllis sometimes misclassiﬁed as lead . According to deﬁnition, a ﬁll
appears between successive phrases of lead . The length of the phrase of lead is longer in most types of
music; hence, most parts of ﬁllare rest note. We think the major feature that can be used to distinguish
ﬁllfrom lead is the ratio of silence. However, in most of cases, the musician combines ﬁllwith the other
arrangement element (usually rhythm ) instead of adding a speciﬁc instrument performing ﬁll.A ss u c h
ﬁllcannot be determined well. We will keep looking for relevant features with which to improve the
performance of arrangement element determination in future work.
4.2 Turing Test-Like Experiment for the Arranged Results
It is difﬁcult to evaluate the effectiveness of our music arranging system because the evaluation of ef-
fectiveness in works of art often comes down to subjective opinion Pearce and Wiggins [2001] proposeda method to evaluate the computer music composition system. We adopted this method in designing
our experiments.
The proposed system can be considered successful if the subjects cannot distinguish between the
system-arranged and the human-arranged music. There were 30 subjects in total. Twenty-two subjects
were composed of graduate and undergraduate students, including four subjects with at least three-year musical training afﬁliated with the Department of Computer Science at National Chiao Tung
University. Eight subjects were music teachers at several private music schools. The prepared dataset
consisted of eight human-arranged and eight system-arranged music objects. The system-arrangedmusic was generated by our system using the parameter setting listed in Table VII in Appendix C.
The same setting was also adopted in the succeeding experiments. The experiment used the ﬁrst
16 music objects in Table III. The music objects were sorted randomly and displayed to the subjects onthe Web page.
3The subjects were asked to listen to each piece and determine whether it was system- or
human-arranged. The proportion of correctly identiﬁed music was calculated from the obtained result,
with “Mean” being the average of the accuracy. The signiﬁcance test was performed with the one-sample t-test against hypothesized value 0.5 (the expected value if subjects discriminated randomly).
Simply speaking, if the mean value is close to 0.5, we can say that it is difﬁcult to distinguish between
the system- and human-arranged music.
The results are shown in Table IV. The mean values of the three groups are close to 0.5 with around
0.15 standard deviations. According to t-test, we can accept the hypothesized value 0.5 using the
3http://www.cs.nctu.edu.tw/ ∼scchiu/mas/survey.html.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 17 ---
8:16 • J.-L. Huang et al.
Table III. Music for Experiments
Music Title Composer S/H
Bluesette (S1,A1) Toots Thielemans S
Jordu (S2,A2,P1) Duke Jordan S
Green Grow the Lilacs (S3,A3,P2) N/A S
Symphony No.5 in C minor, Op.67 Mov.4 Allgro (S4,A4) Beethoven S
On Springﬁeld Mountain N/A S
Lakes of Pontchartrain N/A S
Red River Rock Johnny & the hurricanes S
Some Folks Do Stephen C. Foster S
A Virgin Unspotted Christmas Hymn H
’O Sole Mio N/A (Neapolitan song) H
Playmate/Two Little Maids H. W. Petrie H
The Champion Kristopher M Thornton H
Lazy Mary, Will You Get Up? N/A H
Unfortunate Miss Bailey N/A H
10 Little Indians N/A H
You’re in the Army Now N/A H
Some Folks Do (S5,A5) Stephen C. Foster S
Symphony No.25 in G minor, K.183 (S6,A6) Mozart S
Violin Sonata No. 3, Mov. 1 (S7,A7) Handel S
Love You to (P3) George Harrison H
Ring Ring de Banjo (P4) Stephen C. Foster H
Goober Peas (P5) N/A (USA Civil War) H
S/H: System or human arranges ;ﬁ r s t1 6m u s i ca r eu s e di ne x p e r i m e n t1 ;S 1 , . . . , S 7a r eu s e di ne x p e r i m e n t
3( s c o r i n gs o l o s ) ;A 1 , ..., A 7a r eu s e di ne x p e r i m e n t3( s c o r i n ga c c o m p a n i m e n t ) ;P 1 , ..., P 5a r eu s e di ne x p e r i -
ment 3 (scoring playability).
Table IV. The Results of Discrimination Test
Mean SD DF t P-value
All subjects 0.45 0.1453 29 −1.885 0.0695
All subjects except musically trained subjects 0.444 0.15 17 −1.61 0.1258
Musically trained subjects 0.4688 0.1423 11 −0.76 0.4635
SD: the standard deviation ; DF: the degree of freedom ;t :t statistic .
0.05 level of signiﬁcance; that is, it is difﬁcult to distinguish between the system- and human-arranged
music. Considering p-value, the result of all subjects is more signiﬁcant than the other two separated
groups because the number of all subjects is higher. The discrimination rate of the musically trained
subjects (0.4688) is a little bit higher than the discrimination rate of all the subjects excluding themusically trained subjects (0.444). Such results conform to the intuition that the musically trained
subjects could discriminate with higher precision. Since the discrimination rate of musically trained
subjects is still close to 0.5, we believe that it is not easy to distinguish between the system- andhuman-arranged music even by the musically trained subjects.
4.3 Scoring the Arranged Results
To evaluate the ability of role arrangement, ﬁve music objects were chosen, each of which was arranged
into a solo and accompaniment piano arrangement. The ﬁve objects were selected from the system-
arranged music list in Table III, and were asterisked and assigned numbers following the music title.
The original and arranged versions were put on the web page so that the subjects could listen to them
alternately and comparably. The subjects were asked the question “Do you think the arrangementwas successful?” The question was followed by three tips: (1) Are the original and the arrangement
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 18 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:17
Table V. The Results of Scoring
A: The result of scoring system-arranged piano reduction
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7
Mean 0.643 1 1.143 0.571 0.929 0.5 0.214
SD 0.842 0.877 0.77 0.938 0.73 0.941 0.802
B: The result of scoring system-arranged accompaniment piano part
A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7
Mean 0.986 0.143 0.643 0.429 0.643 0.786 0.429
SD 0.994 1.027 1.008 0.938 0.745 0.699 0.756
C: The result of scoring playability of system-arranged music
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5
Mean 1.182 1.273 1.364 1 0.818
SD 0.874 0.786 0.924 1.247 1.401
similar?, (2) Is the arrangement elegant?, (3) Is the arrangement like piano music?” The average score
of the 22 responses was 0.714. Of the experimental music set, S7 shows the highest score. The melody
and counterpoint are correctly selected for piano, demonstrating characteristics of Baroque music. In
contrast, S6 had the lowest score. We think some phrases were assigned inappropriate utility, so thatthe other important phrases could not be selected. Furthermore, some of the selected phrases with
trill technique performed by violin were not suitable for the piano. This problem may be solved by
considering piano performance properties in utility assignment.
For accompaniment, a similar question was asked, “How satisﬁed are you with the accompaniment
of duo?” The answer contains ﬁve choices: very good ( +2), good ( +1), average (0), bad ( −1), and very
bad (−2). Only 12 subjects answered the question because some of them could not tell which accom-
paniment was of good quality without musical background. The mean of grade was 0.58 and standard
deviation, 0.881. We think that most of the music in our dataset was suitable for being an accompani-
ment of duo. A7, which also shows the lowest grade among seven music objects, was the only one notsuited for duo. We think too many phrases of lead were selected as accompaniment. The failure of ar-
rangement element determination leads to inappropriate utility assignment, and in turn, the incorrect
selection of phrases.
For playability, we displayed the sheet music of the MIDI-format arranged music by general music
software with slight parameter setting for presentation. Both the arranged music and its sheet music
were put on the web page questionnaire so that the subjects could listen and view simultaneously,
then, assign their decisions. The instruction was “Please view the sheet music and determine if it can
be played on the piano.” The ﬁve answer of choices were: 1. It is playable ( +2); 2. It is playable but
hard ( +1); 3. Neutral (0); 4. It may not be playable ( −1); 5. Absolutely, it is not playable ( −2). Note that
this question was optional because not all participants could read sheet music. For eight responses,
the mean was 1.127 and standard deviation, 1.046. This experiment shows that the arranged resultsare playable.
5. CONCLUSION
We present a framework that arranges multipart scores for an instrument with consideration of its role
in music. The arrangement element analysis shows an important factor for arrangement, and can con-
tribute to main melody extraction. To test our framework, we implemented a system which arranges
for a piano. The Turing-test experiment shows that it is difﬁcult to distinguish between human- and
system-arranged music. While our system is able to produce viable and adaptable arrangement for
piano, it can also be applied to many other instruments with the modiﬁcation of playability function inour framework.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 19 ---
8:18 • J.-L. Huang et al.
Fig. 7. Piano-Right-Hand-Playability function.
APPENDIXES
APPENDIX A. Design of the Piano Playability Function
Here we design a playability function, Piano-Right-Hand-Playability , that considers instrumental and
physical limitations for a right hand playing piano, as an example to illustrate the design of the playa-bility functions. Research on automatic piano ﬁngering has been investigated in Kasimi et al. [2005,
2007] and Yonebayashi et al. [2007]; however, the work cannot be used to determine whether a piece of
music can be played by piano. We refer to White [1992] to design this function. According to the phrasewe deﬁned, we assume that a single phrase is playable unless at least one note in the phrase is out of
the pitch range of the instrument. The playability function for right hand is designed in Figure 7. The
function is fed by a set of phrase, denoted by P
List, and will output true or false to indicate whether
these phrases can be played by the target instrument. First, the set of all overlapping note sets in
PList, denoted by onsset, are extracted (lines 1–2). Note that the overlapping note set, ons(note i), is a
set of notes overlapping with note iand ons(note i) includes at least one element, note i. Two main rules
are designed to examine the phrases and the phrases passing both rules are playable. The ﬁrst rule
(lines 3–6) checks each pitch of note to determine whether it is under the pitch range of piano. In thesecond rule (lines 7–10), we examine each overlapping note set in the phrase set to check whether it
assignable for ﬁngers of right hand by Finger-Assignment function.
In Figure 8, we give the ﬂowchart of Finger-Assignable function. The number of notes in nosis ex-
amined ﬁrst. If it is larger than ﬁve, then it is impossible to play by right hand and Finger-Assignment
function will return false. If not, we will consider two cases: the case that the number of nosis two and
the case that the number of nosis between 3 ∼5. These cases are considered separately because the ex-
pansion of thumb-index ﬁnger is different from the other adjacent ﬁngers. If the number of onsis two,
we only have to ensure that the distance between the highest and the lowest notes does not exceed the
distance between thumb and little ﬁnger, denoted by Through
Hand . Otherwise, while the number of
nosis larger than two, the gap between thumb and index, denoted by Thumb Index Gap , can be larger
than the gaps among the other ﬁngers. We assume the legal gap distances among the other ﬁngers are
the same and all of them are denoted by a value, Other Gap . That is, the distance between the lowest
pitch and the second lowest pitch can be larger than the distance among others. According to the size
of general ﬁngers of an adult, we set these parameters heuristically: Th ro u g h Hand =14 semitones,
Thumb Index Gap=5 semitones and Other Gap=3 semitones. These parameters can be speciﬁed by
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 20 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:19
If #( ons) > 5overlapping note set 
ons
yes
If #( ons)<  3falseno
yes
If  (2ndlowest 
pitch-lowest pitch 
< Through_Hand) If  (2ndlowest pitch-lowest 
pitch < Thumb_Index_Gap) 
AND (other gaps < Other_Gap) 
AND (highest pitch – lowest 
pitch < Through_Hand)no
trueyesno
falsetrueyes
falseno
Fig. 8. Finger-Assignable ﬂowchart.
users according to the size of their hands. Finally, the set of overlapping phrases is playable since all
onsare assignable for ﬁngers.
APPENDIX B. Running Example of Phrase Selection Algorithm
Figure 9 shows an example of the process of the proposed phrase selection algorithm with simple playa-
bility function (the distance between the highest and lowest pitch of note cannot exceed 14 semitones)
and MOP =2. Figure 9(a) shows the identiﬁed phrases in the score; and Figure 9(b) shows the phrases
with utilities represented by weighted intervals. Figure 9(c) depicts the result of the transformation.
Since there are seven phrases, 14 indices are created. We use Opt(0,0,13,2 |{}).utand Opt(0,0,13,2
|{}).selto indicate to the optimal utility and the optimal selection, respectively. After that, three at-
tributes of each index are extracted. For example, index 6 corresponds to the end position of phrase p3,
and thus we have g(6).phrase =p3,g(6).utility =2a n d g(6).startI =1. On the other hand, index 4 does
not correspond to the index of the end position of any phrase, g(4).phrase ,g(4).utility ,a n d g(4).startI
are null. The conditional phrase list, CP List, is maintained and initialized to empty. Then, the main
function Opt(0,0,13,2 |{}) is called. The result is obtained with initial base value 0 from index 0 to
13 under the situation of at most two overlapping phrases allowed. As shown in Figure 9(e), after
Opt(0,0,13,2 |{}) is ﬁnished, Opt(0,0,13,2 |{}).ut=20 and Opt(0,0,13,2 |{}).sel={p0,p1,p2,p6}are
returned as the result of the proposed algorithm.
Here we use the example in Figure 9 to describe how function Opt works to compute the opti-
mal selection and the utility of the optimal selection. First of all, the outermost recursive function
Opt(0,0,13,2 |{}) is called to select phrases from index 0 to 13 under room =2 (at most two overlapping
phrases are allowed). Function Opt goes from index 0 to index 13. The value of g(0).phrase is null since
there is no phrase seen at index 0. While function Opt goes to index 3, it is the end position of phrase
p0. Due to the reason that phrase p0 is playable and it is allowed (room >0) to select p0,p0 is selected
and the function Opt(0,0,3,1 |{p0}) is called to check if there is any inﬂuence of selecting p0. No other
phrases can be seen from index 0 to 3, and thus, p0 can be selected ( Opt(0,0,3,2 |{}).sel={p0})a tt h i s
moment.
While determining whether phrase p3 (i.e., g(6).phrase ) is worth to be selected, p3 is selected ﬁrst
and Opt(0,1,5,1 |{p3}) is called. In solving Opt(0,1,5,1 |{p3}), it meets p1a n d p2 because g(3).phrase
and g(5).phrase are not null. However, p0( i . e . , g(3).phrase ) and the phrase in the CP List (i.e., p3), are
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 21 ---
8:20 • J.-L. Huang et al.
p0 p1 p2
p6
p3p4 p5
p0: 4 p1: 2 p2: 8
p6: 6p5: 1 p3: 2 p4: 1(a)
(b)phrase u/g415lity
p0 4
p1 2
p2 8p3 2p4 1
p5 1
p6 6
p0: 4 p1: 2 p2: 8
p6: 6p5: 1 p3: 2 p4: 1
0004466
00002
i 0123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3Opt(0,0, i,2|{}). ut
i=3, CP_List∪{p0}={p3,p0}:not 
playablei=5,Opt(Opt(Opt(0,0,1,2|{}). ut,1,4,1|{ p3}).ut,4,4,0|{
p3,p1}).ut+2 > 0: worth
p0: 4 p1: 2 p2: 8
p6: 6p5: 1 p3: 2 p4: 1
000446666778 1 2
0446666666
i 0123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
i=5, p1:worth i=3, p0:worth i=6, p3:not worth i=9,CP_List∪{p4}={p6,
p4}: not playablei=10, CP_List∪{p5}={p
6,p5}: not playable MOP=2
MOP=2(c)
(d)Opt(Opt(0,0,1,2). ut,1,5,1|{ p3}).ut+2 ≤6: not worth i=6, check p3,Opt(0,1, i,1|{p3}).ut
Opt(0,0, i,2|{}). ut
Opt(0,2, i,1|{p6}).ut
Opt(Opt(0,2,2|{}). ut,2,11,1|{ p6}).ut+6 > 8: worth i=12, check p6,Opt(0,0,6,2|{}). sel={p0,p1}
Opt(0,0,12,2|{}). sel={p0,p1,p6}Opt(0,0,11,2|{}). sel={p0,p1,p4,p5}
p0: 4 p1: 2 p2: 8
p6: 6p5: 1 p3: 2 p4: 1
000446666778 1 2 2 0
66666 1 2
i 0123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
i=9,CP_List∪{p4}={p2,
p4}: not playablei=11, CP_List∪{p5}={p2,
p5}: not playablei=12, Opt(Opt(Opt(0,0,2,2|{}). ut,2,7,1|{p6
}).ut,7,11,0|{ p2,p6}).ut+6 > 6: worthroom =0 room =1MOP=2
(e)room =2
Opt(Opt(0,0,7,2|{}). ut ,7,12,1|{ p2}).ut+8 > 12: worth i=13,check p2,Opt(0,0, i,2|{}). ut
Opt(6,7, i,1|{p2}).ut
Opt(0,0,13,2|{}). sel={p0,p1,p6,p2}
Fig. 9. An example of the phrase selection algorithm: (a) the identiﬁed phrases in the given score; (b) the identiﬁed phrases
represented by intervals; (c) a snapshot at index 6; (d) a snapshot at index 12; (e) a snapshot at index 13.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 22 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:21
Table VI. Parameters for SVM
Parameter Value
The exponent for the polyphomial kernel 1
Gamma for the RBF kernel 0.01
Sets the size of the kernel cache (a prime number) 250007
Sets the tolerance parameter 1.0e-3
Sets the epsilon for round-off error 1.0e-12
The complexity constant C 1
not playable due to the reason that the overlapping part of phrase p0a n d p3 (C4 and E5) exceeds the
Through hand threshold. In contrast, g(5).phrase is playable with the phrase in CP List. In addition,
g(5).phrase is worth to be selected when p3 is selected. However, the utility of the optimal selection
when p3 is selected is not worthier than the utility when p3 is not selected (i.e., Opt(0,1,5,1 |{p3}).ut+
g(6).utility =4<Opt(0,0,5,2 |{}).ut=6). Thus, Opt(0,0,6,2 |{}).utis set to 6. As shown in Figure 9(c),
the optimal selection Opt(0,0,6,2 |{}).selis{p0,p1}. When function Opt goes to index 12, the utility
of the optimal selection when p6 is selected (i.e., Opt(Opt(0,0,2,2 |{}).ut,2,11,1 |{p6}).ut+6=12) is
worthier than the utility when p6 is not selected (i.e., Opt(0,0,11,2 |{}).ut=8). Thus, Opt(0,0,12,2
|{}).utis 12 and Opt(0,0,12,2 |{}).selis{p0,p1,p6}.
Consider the example that phrase p2 is checked in Figure 9(e). Function Opt(6,7,12,1 |{p2}) is called
to examine the inﬂuence of the optimal selection under the condition that p2 is selected. During the
process in Opt(6,7,12,1 |{p2}),p4,p5a n d p6 will be examined sequentially. Phrase p4a n d p5 are not
playable with the phrase in CP List (i.e., p2), while p6 is playable with the phrase in CP List and
room >0 (the value of room is 1). Now function Opt examines whether p6 is worth to be selected by
considering p6w i t h CP List. At this moment, CP List∪g(12). phrase contains two phrases ( p2a n d
p6). Then, p2a n d p6 are sorted and relabeled according to their start positions. Thus, j1=p6a n d
j2=p2. There are three sub-regions: the sub-region from 0 to j1.startI =2w i t h room =MOP =2, the
sub-region from j1.startI =2t o j2.startI =7w i t h room =1, and the sub-region from j2.startI =7t o
i−1=11 with room =0. The utility of the ﬁrst sub-region (from 0 to 2 with room =2)Opt(0,0,2,2|
{}).ut=0 is computed ﬁrst. The optimal utility of the ﬁrst sub-region is taken as the base value of func-
tion Opt(0,2,7,1 |{p6}) for computing the optimal utility of the second sub-region (from 2 to 7 with room
=1). After obtaining Opt(0,2,7,1 |{p6}).ut=6, it is taken as the base value for the third sub-region.
Similarly, we compute the utility of the third sub-region (with base value 6 from 7 to 11 with room =
0) by calling Opt(6,7,11,0 |{p6,p0}). Since phrase p6 is worth to be selected under the condition that
phrase p2 is selected ( w> 6),p2 is selected. Back to the outermost Opt, phrase p2i sa l s ow o r t ht ob es e -
lected. Thus, the ﬁnal optimal selection is {p0,p1,p6,p2}and the utility of the optimal selection is 20.
APPENDIX C. Parameters in the Piano Arrangement System
We put the parameters of the SVM classier and our piano arrangement system in Table VI and
Table VII, respectively.
APPENDIX D. Efﬁciency of the Piano Arrangement System
To evaluate the response time of the system we developed, we conducted an experiment on an IBM
desktop computer with a 2.4 Ghz Intel(R) Pentium(R) quad-core processor with four gigabytes of main
memory running on a Linux 2.6 operating system. We show the information in process for four excerpts
of the music in Table VIII. As can be seen, it was the overlapping phrase rate OPR , not the length of
music and the number of identiﬁed phrases, which inﬂuenced the execution time. OPR is the average
number of overlaps between phrases. When OPR is high, the time complexity of phrase selection let
the execution time grow polynomially.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 23 ---
8:22 • J.-L. Huang et al.
Table VII. Parameters for Our Piano Arrangement System
Parameter Description Value
TS.τ A threshold for track segmentation 0.5
PI.LBDM.threshold A threshold for LBDM 0.6
UA.AE.threshold.ﬁlter (right/left hand) A threshold to ﬁlter the phrases whose utility
is too low0.1/0.1
UA.AE.consider[fo, rh,pa,le,ﬁ](r/l hand) Which arrangement elements are considered [0,0,0,1,1]/ [1,1,1,0,0]
UA.α1,U A .α2 Proportion in utility assignment 0.7, 0.3
PS.MOP (r/l hand) Maximal overlapping phrase allowed in phrase
selection5/5
Pla.Through Hand (r/l hand) In playability, semitone allowed between
thumb and little ﬁnger14/14
Pla.Thumb Index Gap (r/l hand) In playability, semitone allowed betweenthumb and point 4/4
Pla.Other Gap (r/l hand) In playability, semitone allowed between theother adjacent ﬁngers 3/3
TS: Track Segmentation, PI: Phrase Identiﬁcation, UA: Utility Assignment, PS: Phrase Selection, Pla: Playability, AE: Arrangement
Element.
Table VIII. Efﬁciency of Music Arranging System
Music length #st #phr OPR Round in PS Execution time
Blueseet∗1 0:41 7 41 7.86 734 6.06 s
Jordu∗2 3:25 8 237 7.0 1343 57.702 s
Lilacs∗3 1:29 6 310 11.64 9552 42.817 s
Sym. No. 5∗4 1:05 17 112 32.28 38918 156.663 s
st:segmented track ;p h r : phrase ;P S : phrase selection , OPR: Overlapping Phrase Rate .
APPENDIX E (GLOSSARY)
Arrangement element. Arrangement element is the function of a piece of music performed by an instru-
ment.
Phrase. A phrase is continuous line of notes. It can be a melody, countermelody, or an important
accompanying line. [Liu et al., 2006]
Arrangement. The term arrangement is often considered synonymous with transcriptions. But, in
computer music ﬁeld, transcription is commonly used to mean the act of notating a piece or a sound
which was previous annotated. Thus, we still use the term, arrangement, to make a distinction.
Score reduction. Score reduction is a process that arranges music for a target instrument by reducing
original music.
REFERENCES
BERNDT ,A . ,H ARTMANN ,K . ,R OBER ,N . , AND MASUCH , M. 2006. Composition and arrangement techniques for music in interactive
immersive environments. In Proceedings of the Audio Mostly Conference .
BOSER ,B . ,G UYON ,I . , AND VAPNIK , V. 1992. A training algorithm for optimal margin classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual
Workshop on Computational Learning Theory .
BRUCKER ,P . AND NORDMANN , L. 1994. The k-track assignment problem. SIAM J. Comput. 52.
CAMBOUROPOULOS , E. 2001. The local boundary detection model (LBDM) and its application in the study of expressive timing. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference (ICMC’01) .
CHUNG , J. W. 2006. The affective remixer: Personalized music arranging. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (ACM SIGCHI’06) .
COROZINE , V. 2002. Arranging Music for the Real World. Mel Bay.
DANIEL ,R . AND POTTER , W. D. 2006. GA-based music arranging for guitar. In Proceedings of the International Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC’06) .
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

--- Page 24 ---
Towards an Automatic Music Arrangement Framework Using Score Reduction • 8:23
HASTIE ,T . AND TIBSHRANI , R. 1998. Classiﬁcation by pairwise coupling. Ann. Stat. 26 ,2 .
JONES ,N .C . AND PEVZNER , P. A. 2004. An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms .M I TP r e s s .
KASIMI ,A .A . ,N ECHOLS ,E . , AND RAPHAEL , C. 2007. A simple algorithm for automatic generation of polyphonic piano ﬁngerings.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR’07) .
KASIMI ,A .A . ,N ECHOLS ,E . , AND RAPHAEL , C. 2005. Automatic ﬁngering system (AFS). In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR’05) .
LUI,S . ,H ORNER ,A . , AND AYERS , L. 2006. MIDI to SP-MIDI transcoding using phrase stealing. IEEE Multimedia 13 ,2 .
MIRANDA , E. R. 2001. Composing Music with Computers . Focal Press.
NAGASHIMA ,T . AND KAWASHIMA , J. 1997. Experimental study on arranging music by chaotic neural network. Int. J. Intell. Syst.
12,4 .
OWSINSKI , B. 1999. The Mixing Engineer’s Handbook . Thomson Course Technology.
PEARCE ,M . AND WIGGINS , G. 2001. Towards a framework for the evaluation of machine Compositions. In Proceedings of the
Symposium on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Creativity in the Arts and Sciences (AISB’01) .
RIMSKY -KORSAKOV , N. A. 1888. Sheherazade, Op. 35 (Piano Reduction). G. Schirmer, Inc.
SORENSEN ,A . AND BROWN , A. R. 2000. Introducing jMusic. In Proceedings of the Australasian Computer Music Conference .
STEIN , L. 1979. Structure & Style: The Study and Analysis of Musical Forms . Summy-Birchard Music.
TUOHY ,D .R . AND POTTER , W. D. 2006. An evolved neural network/HC hybrid for tablature creation in GA-based guitar arranging.
InProceedings of the International Computer Music Conference (ICMC’06) .
WHITE , G. 1992. Instrumental Arranging. McGraw-Hill.
WITTEN ,I .H . AND FRANK , E. 2005. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques . Morgan Kaufmann.
YONEBAYASHI ,Y . ,K AMEOKA ,H . , AND SAGAYAMA , S. 2007. Automatic decision of piano ﬁngering based on hidden Markov models.
InProceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI’07) .
Received June 2010; revised November 2010; accepted November 2010
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications, Vol. 8, No. 1, Article 8, Publication date: January 2012.

