--- Page 1 ---
MusicAIR: A Multimodal AI Music Generation
Framework Powered by an Algorithm-Driven Core
Callie C. Liao
Stanford University
Stanford, USA
ccliao@stanford.eduDuoduo Liao
George Mason University
Fairfax, USA
dliao2@gmu.eduEllie L. Zhang
IntelliSky
McLean, USA
elzhang@intellisky.org
Abstract—Recent advances in generative AI have made music
generation a prominent research focus. However, many neural-
based models rely on large datasets, raising concerns about
copyright infringement and high-performance costs. In contrast,
we propose MusicAIR, an innovative multimodal AI music gener-
ation framework powered by a novel algorithm-driven symbolic
music core, effectively mitigating copyright infringement risks.
The music core algorithms connect critical lyrical and rhythmic
information to automatically derive musical features, creating a
complete, coherent melodic score solely from the lyrics. The Mu-
sicAIR framework facilitates music generation from lyrics, text,
and images. The generated score adheres to established principles
of music theory, lyrical structure, and rhythmic conventions.
We developed Generate AI Music (GenAIM1), a web tool using
MusicAIR for lyric-to-song, text-to-music, and image-to-music
generation. In our experiments, we evaluated AI-generated music
scores produced by the system using both standard music metrics
and innovative analysis that compares these compositions with
original works. The system achieves an average key confidence of
85%, outperforming human composers at 79%, and aligns closely
with established music theory standards, demonstrating its ability
to generate diverse, human-like compositions. As a co-pilot tool,
GenAIM can serve as a reliable music composition assistant and
a possible educational composition tutor while simultaneously
lowering the entry barrier for all aspiring musicians, which
is innovative and significantly contributes to AI for music
generation.
Index Terms—AI music generation, lyric-rhythm alignment,
lyric-to-music generation, image-to-music generation, melodic
motion, melodic smoothness, natural language processing
I. INTRODUCTION
Generative AI has experienced rapid escalation and inte-
gration into daily lives, particularly with the frequent use
of conversational chatbots such as ChatGPT [1] powered by
Large-Language Models (LLMs). However, AI music gener-
ation, especially multimodal inputs from images, lags behind
AI art and writing due to its complex structure and required
musical expertise. Current methods rely on deep learning [2]
[3] [4] [5], using large datasets for music generation in formats
such as song scores, audio, plain text, or other types of data,
but face challenges including data collection, copyright risks,
high computing costs, and labor-intensive data preparation [6]
[7] [8]. [9] also describes a comprehensive survey regarding
deep learning methods for music creation. These approaches
pose several challenges: 1) significant amounts of data need
1GenAIM: https://genaim.intellisky.ai/
Fig. 1: The framework of MusicAIR.
to be collected to produce more accurate results; 2) potential
copyright infringement issues for generated music can arise
while training models; 3) high-cost computing resources may
be required for training, limiting researchers’ capabilities in
producing reliable models for music generation; and 4) most
models involve significant data collection and processing,
which would frequently necessitate heavy manual labor.
There has been progress made in pure music generation
[6] [11] [2], but lyrics-based music generation has been more
difficult. Recently, there has been an increase in text-guided
music generation research such as text-to-melody, text-to-
music, and text-to-audio generation, where text is not included
as lyrics, contributing to pure music generation [6] [2] [3].
However, most of the methods described above are neural-
based, and even though many of them incorporate some music
theory knowledge and conventions in an effort to create more
reasonable models, it could raise the possibility that their
generated music diverges from music theory guidelines and
proper lyric-note alignment. Additionally, it is possible that
utilizing existing songs as data introduces potential copyright
infringement issues in the future.
In developing a musically robust song generation method,
knowledge of music theory, literature, and linguistics is re-
quired to emulate the intuitive thinking process of lyricists,
composers, and singer-songwriters, while not necessarily re-
lying on existing music to train and develop such algorithms.arXiv:2511.17323v1  [cs.SD]  21 Nov 2025

--- Page 2 ---
(a) Original composition [10].
(b) AI-generated song.
Fig. 2: AI-generated song vs. human-written song using the same lyrics.
Therefore, we propose Music AI fRamework (MusicAIR), an
innovative multimodal framework powered by a novel purely
algorithm-driven symbolic music core. Our core method only
utilizes lyrics and novel algorithms, addressing the challenges
listed above. We aim to leverage the correlations between
lyrical and musical components, as inspired by [12] [13]
where through quantitative analytics, keywords are discovered
to have a tendency to land on strong beats to create songs
with rhythmic structures suitable for both the lyrics and
the melodies. Our approach also attempts to discover latent
rhythmic, syllabic, and stress patterns to help determine the
rhythm and pitches. The lyrics and the melodies would be
properly aligned, with lyrical stress matching the emphasized
beats (i.e., strong beats) in the music.
For this pilot study, we created Generate AI Music
(GenAIM), a lyric-to-song, image-to-music, and lyric-to-music
generation web tool based on our MusicAIR framework.
Figure 12 presents two examples of GenAIM-generated music.
Our generation method includes features such as customizable
key signatures and instruments for playback (Figure 5), as
well as sheet music for display (Figure 6). In our analysis,
we used music-theory-based metrics, as evaluating the degree
of alignment to music theory guidelines for the generated
melodies is our core focus.
In this paper, we encompass the relationship between lyrics
and melody, music theory guidelines, and composers’ intuition
to develop a non-neural approach towards AI music genera-
tion from lyrics and generate human-sounding music, which
differentiates our approach from existing methods in this field.
Our main contributions are listed as follows:
•Our framework, MusicAIR, processes various input
types, including lyrics and images, to generate pleasant-
sounding melodies utilizing only input lyrics or text de-
rived from images. This innovative approach, particularly
the novel non-neural lyric-to-music algorithms that does
not rely on training data, drastically differentiates from
existing music generation models while ensuring high
lyric-music compatibilities. It ensures the avoidance of
copyright infringement while remaining cost-effective.
•Our key methods in the music core for song generation
is achieving lyrical alignment with the rhythmic structure
through the innovative use of keywords and strong beats
for proper beat alignment, alongside an emphasis onmusic theory conventions.
•The image-to-music methods proposed in our MusicAIR
framework employ Large Language Model (LLM) tech-
nologies to only generate lyrics, followed by the use of
our purely algorithmic approach to automatically com-
pose classical music or songs.
•As a co-pilot web tool, GenAIM inspires composers
and supports individuals of any background by utilizing
visual imagery to transform thoughts to music, all while
preserving human creativity as a reliable music compo-
sition assistant. Moreover, with the addition of symbolic
music generation and the flexibility of melody generation,
GenAIM can be highly useful in education by serving as
a composition tutor to students of any level given that
sheet music and audio replay are provided. Additionally,
it offers a range of benefits, including entertainment,
relaxation, and support for mental well-being.
•Our evaluations are primarily based on music theory rules
instead of human listening feedback in other research
concerning music generation, as music theory standards
are objective and thus more fitting for the research in this
paper than listening evaluations, which the latter would
come from varied music backgrounds and mixed percep-
tions, making it difficult to consolidate. We innovatively
apply evaluation metrics such as interval-based melodic
smoothness and step ratios to evaluate AI-generated songs
based on comparisons with the original human-composed
songs, introducing more robust theory-based evaluations
to the field of AI music.
II. RELATEDWORK
A. Lyric-to-Music Generation
There has been progress made, particularly in lyric-to-
music generation with or without neural networks. Some have
been developed into more efficient music generation methods,
although there are limitations.
1) Lyric-to-Music Generation with Neural Networks:Re-
cent research has investigated the generation of music from
lyrics using neural networks techniques, especially deep learn-
ing. [7] develops the melody composition model based on
the sequence-to-sequence framework to compose melody from
lyrics. [14] proposes SongMASS that expands upon the
previous MASS [15] by switching to a song-masked pre-

--- Page 3 ---
training strategy and a separate lyric-to-lyric and melody-to-
melody encoder-decoder to ensure smoother lyric-to-melody
and melody-to-lyric generation. [16] proposes a two-melody
self-supervised generation system that is neural-based and
utilizes paired lyric-rhythm data. Some researchers have in-
corporated music theory and relationships between the lyrics,
rhythm, and melody as well [17] [18]. Although these ap-
proaches have achieved relative reliability in their results
and improvements, the models rely on significant amounts of
prior training data, potentially increasing the computing power
required to process large datasets. It also raises the question
of improving neural-based models in modern-day AI, which
is also related to scaling laws [19]: is collecting more data the
only method forward for technological advancements?
2) Lyric-to-Music Generation without Neural Networks:
Few non-deep learning methods for lyric-to-music generation
have been investigated. [20] proposes a purely algorithmic
composition algorithm that uses lyric-note correlations cap-
tured by frequent pattern mining on the song database to
generate Probabilistic Automaton (PA) [21] for melody com-
position. This method relies on data, neglecting pitch-lyric
matching and alignment, and only considers tonal languages,
raising concerns about stress and syllable grouping. [22] in-
troduces Markov chains [23] for lyrics-to-melody generation,
though challenges exist in maintaining high-level consistency
due to local statistical similarities. [24] introduces an algorithm
that considers compositions in a method inclined towards using
probability to achieve music generation, but there is not a
strong emphasis on lyrical alignment and specific consider-
ation on lyrical and language aspects such as stress.
We aim to directly generate a song from lyrics by using
pure algorithms geared towards a composer’s intuition as well
as non-neural-based approaches. Furthermore, we creatively
leverage the relationship between keywords, stressed syllables,
and stressed beats, as well as other statistical, rhythmic, and
lyrical features found in [12] [25] [13], all of which are derived
from patterns in music theory. The derived patterns are largely
based on the intuition of composers and lyricists, mirroring our
approach for the music core.
B. Image-to-Music Generation
Currently, image-to-music generation remain relatively un-
explored. Research in this area involves deep learning methods
that extract essential visual attributes, which are subsequently
translated into melodies, harmonies, and rhythmic patterns
[26]. Emotion is heavily considered in various ways. Some
utilize the Valence-Arousal (V A) emotional space to detect the
emotional tone of an image, while other researchers perform
image analysis while assuming that components are musically
related [27] [28] [29]. In general, all the works emphasize the
potential emotions that could be extracted from the images.
Recent research methodologies [30] [31] [32] focus on gener-
ating audio music from multiple modalities, including images,
and text. MelFusion [30] synthesizes music from image and
language cues using diffusion models. However, our image-to-
music methodology distinguishes from these by utilizing LLMtechnologies to generate lyrics from an input image before
employing the music core, our purely algorithmic lyric-to-
music approach, to generate the corresponding music, reducing
the need to specifically analyze emotions from the image.
III. THEMETHODOLOGY
The system architectures consist of the MusicAIR frame-
work and music core, each of which is described in detail in
the following sections.
A. The Framework of MusicAIR
As shown in Figure 1, the MusicAIR framework encom-
passes a range of inputs, including textual lyrics and images.
Lyrics are directly fed into the music core, which creates music
from the text input, generating both sheet music and audio
files. Images are first converted into lyrics using LLMs [33]
before further processing. The generated lyrics are then passed
to the music core, where elements such as pitches, rhythms,
and phrases are determined based on the text. Once the music
or song is generated, the framework outputs the results in
MIDI or sheet music format. The specific algorithms used in
the music core are expanded upon below.
B. The Music Core
The innovative AI music generation core, comprises four
key modules: score setup, rhythmic score construction, pitch
construction, and score conversion as shown in Figure 3. Each
of these modules is explained in the following sections.
Fig. 3: The flowchart of the music core.
1) Score Setup:To set up the score, lyrical information is
first extracted from the lyrics, with key information including
syllables and keywords prioritized. Phrases are identified pri-
marily through punctuation and sentence endings. Keyword
and syllabic information are utilized to determine the time
signature for the new score through the method described
in [25], which uses machine learning models, or through
pure algorithms that extract latent stress information directly
from lyrical patterns. After the time signature is determined,
the number of accents per measure is retrieved. Along with
the number of keywords, this becomes one of the factors
for determining the total number of measures. For the key
signature, the sentiment feature is used to roughly determine
whether the key signature would be major or minor. Sentiment
analysis is conducted to extract the positivity, negativity, or
neutrality of the lyrical content. Generally, positive sentiment
aligns with the major key and negative sentiment aligns with
the minor key. However, users are able to select their preferred

--- Page 4 ---
key signature. The score setup algorithm is described in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1:Score Setup
Input:lyrical text of one songT.
Output:time signaturets, key signatureks,
number of measuresNm,
a phrase listLp, a word dictionaryDw.
1: InitializeDw
2: Create a nested listLpfromT
3:foreach phrasepinLpdo
4:foreach wordwinpdo
5:flag= DetermineKeyword(w)
6:sylls= GetSyllables(w)
7:Dw[w] =tuple(flag, sylls)
8:end for
9:end for
10: sent = GetSentiment(T)
11:ts,ks= DetermineSignatures(Lp, sent)
12:Nm= DetermineMeasureNum(Dw,ts)
13:returnts,ks,Nm,Lp,Dw
2) Rhythmic Score Construction:The time signature is
critical for constructing the rhythmic structure of the score,
establishing the fundamental structure of the song, and en-
suring each phrase is distributed into the appropriate number
of measures. Keyword insertion is then performed by insert-
ing keywords into the stressed beats within each measure
following the order specified by the lyrics. The connection
between keywords and stressed beats, as discovered in [12]
[13], is employed in this proposed lyric-to-music generation
framework. Algorithm 2 describes the method.
Algorithm 2:Rhythmic Score Construction
Input:time signaturets, number of measuresNm,
a phrase listLp, a word dictionaryDw.
Output:A rhythmic score listLr.
1: InitializeLras a list
2:foreach measuredo
3:R= BuildRhythm(Dw,Lp)
4: InsertRintoLr
5:end for
6:returnLr
3) Pitch Construction:When all the lyrics have been placed
in their corresponding locations, the rhythmic structure is
established for the song, and the pitch is considered. The
parameters for the pitch construction are set up first. The
key signature, pitch range, and phrase lengths are considered.
The key signature not only establishes the mood and tone of
the song, but also the appropriate notes for the major/Ionian
or minor/Aeolian mode, which is also determined by the
key (e.g., D major). As mentioned previously, our method
allows users to choose their preferred key or select a random
Fig. 4: Lyrics generation from the image.
key, where the key containing the highest alignment with the
melody (termed askey confidencein this paper) is chosen
among a couple of randomly selected key signatures. A pitch
range is constructed based on the selected key and kept within
a certain comfortable singing range for most individuals.
The phrase lengths are considered to gauge the approximate
average number of measures used per phrase.
The parameters described above help the pitch generation
process. This process is paired with pitch insertion, and the
two processes are in a feedback loop until all pitches have been
inserted into the score. The pitches would first be randomly
generated but automatically adapted to music theory; then,
they are inserted into the corresponding lyrics before multiple
notes are adjusted by phrase to ensure a smoother connection
between the notes and create a flowing melody. The degree of
randomness would provide greater phrase variety even after
pitch adjustment, thus preventing excess repetition that would
facilitate less enjoyment.
4) XML Score Conversion:When the score construction is
complete along with the pitch construction, the score is con-
verted to MusicXML [34] files for readability and easier usage
in composition software and general audio/music notation
software. Additionally, converting the completed score into
MusicXML provides easier digital sheet music exchanges and
collaborations. In the system, the MusicXML file is utilized to
help display the sheet music upon the generation of non-lyrical
music or a lyrical song.
C. Image-to-Lyrics Generation
Different images are fed into LLMs to automatically gen-
erate lyrical rhythmic information of multiple phrases. In
addition to the input images, preference prompts are added to
customize the lengths generated by the LLMs. The generated
lyrical rhythmic information is then employed to construct
the rhythmic score. Figure 4 presents examples of prompts
designed to generate song lyrics from a given image using the
LLM, along with the resulting lyrics.
D. GenAIM System Architecture
This MusicAIR framework is built on the Amazon Web
Services (AWS) platform. It utilizes several services includ-
ing networking and content delivery, application integration,
database, storage, artificial intelligence, security, identity, and
compliance. The core music generation module directly creates
music from the input lyrics, producing both sheet music and

--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 5: The user level of GenAIM.
audio files. The input image is processed by the LLMs of the
AI service, which generate the lyrics [33]. These generated
lyrics are then passed to the music core for music composition.
The front end web application loads the music files from the
AWS cloud, renders to a music sheet, and plays the music.
The GenAIM system architecture is explained through the
user level and the system level.
1) User Level:As shown in Figure 5, two forms of input
are accepted at the user level: lyrics and image. Users can
choose their preferred key signature or the ”random” option
that selects a moderately fitting key, while the most fitting time
signature is determined by the algorithm based on the input
lyrics. Additionally, users can choose to generate non-lyrical
music or a lyrical song. When the result has been generated,
a dropdown menu offers a variety of instruments that the
user can select for playback, such as the guitar and piano.
Additionally, users can access their music history to view all
of the past generated songs, rate their songs, and replay and
review them again if necessary. The music history is shown
in detail in Figure 6.
2) System Level:At the system level shown in Figure
1, an image or a set of lyrics is accepted, but the features
are extracted from the image using LLMs before further
processing is performed. The lyrics or image features are
transferred to the music core, where pitches, rhythms, phrases,
etc. are determined based on the lyrics. Upon generating non-
lyrical music or a song, the framework presents the results in
a MIDI or sheet music format.
E. Evaluation Metrics
Multiple metrics are used to evaluate the robustness of the
system. The main metrics are key confidence, melodic smooth-
ness, and rhythm matching. Key confidence evaluates key
signature alignment with the generated melody, while melodic
smoothness evaluates the degree of resemblance to human-
composed melodies through the smoothness of a melody.
Rhythm matching evaluates alignment between stressed beats
and stressed lyrical elements and vice versa.
1) Key Confidence:In this paper, the termkey confidence
is defined by the extent to which a musical passage implies
a particular key based on human perception. This metric is
denoted as the correlation coefficientr:r=Pn
i=1(Xi−¯X)(Y i−¯Y)qPn
i=1(Xi−¯X)2Pn
i=1(Yi−¯Y)2(1)
In Equation 1,X iand ¯Xrepresent the input vector and
its corresponding average, respectively;Y iand¯Yrepresent
the key-profile values of the designated key and its cor-
responding average, respectively; andnis the number of
pairs. The Krumhansl-Schmuckler key-finding algorithm [35]
is employed to calculate the correlation coefficient [36]. The
algorithm utilizes a set of key profiles derived from human
perception of the importance of each pitch within a key for
all 24 scales. These key profiles are used to compare with the
input music to calculate the correlation, and the key with the
highest correlation is the most fitting key for the music.
2) Melodic Smoothness:Melodic smoothness metrics in-
clude average interval, step ratio, and direction change rate.
Theaverage intervalis defined assin Equation 2, where
|∆xi|represents each absolute interval between two successive
pitches andNrepresents the total number of intervals. A
lower average interval represents a smoother melody, reflecting
smaller pitch deviations between notes.
s=PN
i=1|∆xi|
N(2)
Thestep ratiois a complementary metric for evaluating
melodic smoothness. In music theory, step are characterized by
intervals of one or two semitones (i.e., half steps) between suc-
cessive pitches, while leaps exceed this range [37]. A higher
step ratio consisting of more steps than leaps indicates more
stepwise motion. However, even melodies composed entirely
of steps can potentially lack natural, human-like variation,
since smaller leaps still occur commonly in human-composed
melodies. As a result, it is critical to include both metrics in
the evaluation of melodic smoothness. The step ratio is defined
in Equation 3:
Step-Ratio=steps
steps+leaps(3)
Thedirection change raterepresents contour smoothness
and counts how often the direction of the melody changes.
Fewer direction changes correspond to a smoother and more
flowing melody. The rate is normalized by the sequence length
to get a relative value.
IV. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS& EVALUATION
We performed AI music generation with the web tool
GenAIM using our proposed framework, MusicAIR, and con-
ducted exploratory data analysis using Music21 [38], a Python-
based development toolkit created by the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology (MIT), to discover potential similarities
and differences between an AI-generated and an original
composition. The toolkit has been established as robust for
theory-based evaluations and is suitable for the field of algo-
rithmic composition [39]. Human listening evaluations are not
included in this paper, as the core focus is on theory-based

--- Page 6 ---
Fig. 6: Display of the music history feature in GenAIM.
metrics and the background variability of listeners may create
conclusions that are difficult to consolidate. Additionally, we
seek to discover correlations and trends within each compo-
sition. The web tool GenAIM generates music from text and
image forms, as seen in Figures 6 and 12. The algorithm-
driven music core has no specific requirements for GPU/CPU
models, the amount of memory, and the operating system. The
GenAIM system is deployed on AWS, and only Python 3.0+
is used for implementation.
Two experiments are performed: 1) 24 original songs from
children’s piano books are used for comparison with multiple
AI-generated scores for each song; and 2) the evaluation
metrics evaluate 517 generated music from the GenAIM
database by anonymous users. Sections A to C cover the first
experiment, and Section D covers the second experiment.
For the first experiment, all AI musical scores are generated
by the music core using the same lyrics from the songs.
For each song, 3 to 5 songs are generated in the same
time signature with different keys from a selection of 17
key signatures, resulting in the collection of 97 AI-generated
songs. It is guaranteed that for each set of lyrics, there will
Fig. 7: Melody motion comparisons.be at least one generated song that contains the same key
signature as the original song. Figure 2 displays the two
compositions for comparison. Figure 2a displays an original
song written by a young child [10]. Figure 2b showcases one
version of the AI-generated musical score that utilizes the
same lyrics. The first experiment is expanded upon further
in the upcoming sections.
A. Melodic Motion and Smoothness
Figure 7 shows a motion plot of three example AI-generated
songs in different key signatures. On the x-axis, the numbers
are relative to the number of notes generated throughout the
piece. The figure shows that each turning point in the generated
songs closely aligns with those of the original song, revealing
that the rhythmic patterns between the original and generated
songs are highly similar. Although there is more deviation
from the original song in the pitch trends, this is reasonable
because pitches have more flexibility in determining melodic
flow as long as the melody is not too jarring or sudden.
Additionally, the general motions of all five songs are visually
smooth, and there are no jagged portions, displaying a closer
resemblance to human-composed music.
Figure 8a presents violin-box plots of smoothness metrics
for generated songs. The average interval represents the mean
absolute pitch distance between successive notes, with lower
values corresponding to more stepwise motion. The step ratio
measures the proportion of stepwise to leaping motion and
is generally associated with smoother melodies, and such
melodies often have values above 0.6. Lastly, the direction
change rate evaluates the frequency with which a song changes
direction melodically, where high values would indicate too
much variability. In the figure, the median average interval
of 2.58 is consistent with typical stepwise motion due to its
closeness to the interval range for a step. The median step
ratio is 0.574, which approaches the threshold 0.6. The median
direction change rate of 0.567 indicates a balance in the

--- Page 7 ---
(a) Melodic smoothness of generated songs.
 (b) Melodic smoothness of original songs.
Fig. 8: Comparison of Melodic smoothness.
(a) Key confidence comparisons.
 (b) Average Key confidence comparisons.
Fig. 9: Evaluations of the paired original and AI-generated songs.
frequency of changing direction. Overall, these metrics reveal
that the generated songs display high melodic smoothness
and show that the algorithm executes a smooth musical pitch
construction.
Figure 8b shows violin-box plots of smoothness metrics
for the original songs. Compared to the generated songs, the
original songs exhibit higher median step ratios and direction
change intervals, but lower average intervals. The higher
step ratio suggests more steps than leaps, while the lower
average interval indicates less distance between successive
notes. However, the higher direction change rate reflects a
higher chance of jarring changes, and the overall uneven
and stretched distribution for the original songs indicates
high variability. After comparisons, the generated songs still
maintain consistent high melodic smoothness.
B. Key Confidence
Figure 9a displays violin-box plots of key confidence scores
that compare scores between three composer types: human,
AI, and averaged AI. The key confidence score uses the
key analysis algorithms demonstrated in Equation 1 to de-
termine the tonal center. The AI composer generates a song
retaining the same time signature and key signature that
the human composer used for every shared song, but the
averaged AI composer generates 3-5 song versions per set
of lyrics without needing to adhere to the human composer’s
selected parameters. From the figure, the distribution for the
human composer is significantly broader and longer than the
distribution for both AI composers. The AI composers havea more concentratedkey confidencethat is especially in the
0.8-0.9 range—0.887 and 0.876 for the median of the AI
and AI averaged composers, respectively, indicating that an
AI composer is more likely to generate songs with a more
fitting key signature than a human composer.
Fig. 10: Rhythm matching comparisons.
Figure 9b displays similar information, except that each
composer is divided by time signatures. Key confidence scores
are averaged based on the time signature (3/4, 4/4, or all).
Between the AI composers, the regular AI composer still
retains the same key signature that the human composer
selected, but the averaged AI composer does not need to. In
this figure, all the human-composed songs have average key
confidence values around 0.80, while the AI composers all
have a minimum of 8% higher key confidence value than the
human composer in their respective time signature, reinforcing
our method’s reliability in producing fitting melodies.

--- Page 8 ---
(a) Average Interval
 (b) Step Ratio and Direction Change Rate
 (c) Key Confidence
Fig. 11: Evaluations of AI-generated 517 songs from both lyrics and images by anonymous users.
C. Rhythm Matching
Figure 10 displays rhythm matching, which is critical for
ensuring that rhythms give more priority through durations and
beat locations to keywords. For evaluating the average rhythm
matching accuracy of generated songs when compared to
original songs, the score was 76.8% for 3/4 time signatures and
73.6% for all songs regardless of time signatures, indicating
a relatively high matching accuracy. Although the rhythm
matching score was 69.8% for 4/4 time signatures, deviation
from the original song is expected, as song composition is
not definite and contains a significant degree of flexibility —
it is only recommended that keywords and strong beats are
associated with each other based on research from [12] [13].
D. Comparison Metrics with User-Generated Songs
In this alternate experiment with 517 generated music
from both lyrics and images by anonymous users, the same
evaluation metrics are used. However, because the music
originates from anonymous contributors and the lyrics or
images have not previously been set to music, there are no
original songs or music available for comparison. Figures
11a, 11b, and 11c display the corresponding violin plots
for the average interval, the step ratio and direction change
rate, and the key confidence, respectively. For median values,
the average interval of 2.56 is still consistent with stepwise
motion; the step ratio of 0.583 is close to the threshold 0.6
as well; the direction change rate of 0.571 also suggests that
there is a relatively equal frequency of changing to different
directions; and the key confidence value of 0.828 is similarly
high, demonstrating high key signature alignment with the
generated melodies. As a result, this indicates that GenAIM’s
performance is consistent across all generated songs and aligns
with theory-based evaluation benchmarks.
V. CONCLUSIONS& FUTUREWORK
We introduced MusicAIR, a state-of-the-art multimodal
music generation framework powered by an algorithm-driven
lyric-to-music generation core. The method supported by our
framework enables music generation by integrating both lyri-
cal and non-lyrical inputs, including text and images. Further-
more, the lyric-to-music generation process does not rely onprior training data. Comprehensive musical analysis performed
through music21, a confirmed robust method of analysis and
evaluation through music theory, compared the results of 97
AI-generated songs to the original human-composed songs, as
well as evaluated 517 anonymously generated music from the
GenAIM database. Our experimental findings demonstrate that
the overall averaged key confidence values for the generated
songs matching one original song reach 0.85 compared to
0.79 for the original, human-composed songs. The average
rhythmic matching is 73.6% for all generated songs when
compared with original songs. Furthermore, the anonymously
generated songs demonstrate a 0.828 key confidence. There-
fore, using MusicAIR, GenAIM is capable of generating
highly fitting melodies rhythmically and melodically. Although
human listening evaluations were not performed, we believe
that evaluating based on music theory standards, an objective
and reasonable nature, is more fitting for the research in this
paper in particular than listening evaluations, as the main
objective of our paper is to determine if GenAIM aligns with
music theory rules. Overall, our novel method can inspire
music generation techniques from a refreshing perspective. As
our framework evolves, we believe our method will benefit
both amateur and professional musicians as a copilot and
an educational tutor and help accelerate the composition
workflow and learning process by aspiring musicians.
Since this paper is solely focused on the generation of
main melodies, no further musical complexity is added. For
future work, the pitch construction can still be improved
upon by adding more layers of complexity, such as including
chord progressions and a variety of cadences. Furthermore,
more experiments with different songwriting genres can be
considered to present more diverse AI-generated works, which
may impact both the rhythmic structure and pitch construction.
LIMITATIONS
One limitation of using LLMs to extract image information
is that the process may lack contextual depth and creativity.
Furthermore, our algorithm for generating music from lyrics
currently does not have multiple variations for different moods
and genres. These limitations will be improved upon and
optimized in our future work.

--- Page 9 ---
(a) Lyric-to-music generation.
 (b) Image-to-music generation.
Fig. 12: Music generation from lyrics and the image.

--- Page 10 ---
VI. ETHICALIMPLICATIONS
Lyrics-to-music generation with deep learning poses ethical
challenges. The proposed method doesnotuse deep learning
in the lyric-to-music process, but LLMs are utilized to analyze
the image for music inspiration. LLMs help shape rhyth-
mic structure but do not directly generate music, preventing
copyright concerns and ensuring the AI-generated songs are
original. All images, text, lyrics, and music samples used
are either created by the authors or generated through their
GenAIM web tool, eliminating copyright issues.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkatet al., “Gpt-4
technical report,”ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[2] A. Agostinelli, T. I. Denk, Z. Borsos, J. Engel, M. Verzetti, A. Caillon,
Q. Huang, A. Jansen, A. Roberts, M. Tagliasacchiet al., “Musiclm:
Generating music from text,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11325, 2023.
[3] K. Chen, Y . Wu, H. Liu, M. Nezhurina, T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, and
S. Dubnov, “Musicldm: Enhancing novelty in text-to-music generation
using beat-synchronous mixup strategies,”IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024.
[4] S. Tian, C. Zhang, W. Yuan, W. Tan, and W. Zhu, “Xmusic: Towards
a generalized and controllable symbolic music generation framework,”
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, pp. 1–15, 2025.
[5] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,”Nature, vol. 521,
pp. 436–444, 2015.
[6] J. Copet, F. Kreuk, I. Gat, T. Remez, D. Kant, G. Synnaeve, Y . Adi,
and A. Defossez, “Simple and controllable music generation,” inAd-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, A. Oh, T. Neumann,
A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, Eds., vol. 36. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 47 704–47 720.
[7] H. Baoet al., “Neural melody composition from lyrics,”NLPCC, vol.
11838, p. 499–511, 2019.
[8] H.-W. Dong and Y .-H. Yang, “Convolutional generative adversarial
networks with binary neurons for polyphonic music generation,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.09399, 2018.
[9] S. Ji, J. Luo, and X. Yang, “A comprehensive survey on deep music gen-
eration: Multi-level representations, algorithms, evaluations, and future
directions,”ArXiv, vol. abs/2011.06801, 2020.
[10] E. L. Zhang, “Birds are flying,”Journal of Children’s Music, vol. 365,
p. 9, Nov. 2016.
[11] Q. Huang, D. S. Park, T. Wang, T. I. Denk, A. Ly, N. Chen, Z. Zhang,
Z. Zhang, J. Yu, C. Franket al., “Noise2music: Text-conditioned music
generation with diffusion models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03917,
2023.
[12] C. C. Liao, D. Liao, and J. Guessford, “Multimodal lyrics-rhythm
matching,” inProc. of the 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. on Big Data (BigData),
2022, pp. 3622–3630.
[13] C. C. Liao, D. Liao, and E. L. Zhang, “ Relationships between Keywords
and Strong Beats in Lyrical Music ,” in2024 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (BigData). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, Dec. 2024, pp. 3191–3199. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/BigData62323.2024.10825973
[14] Z. Shenget al., “SongMASS: Automatic song writing with pre-training
and alignment constraint,” inAAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
New York, New York, USA, 2020.
[15] K. Song, X. Tan, T. Qin, J. Lu, and T.-Y . Liu, “Mass: Masked se-
quence to sequence pre-training for language generation,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.02450, 2019.
[16] Z. Juet al., “TeleMelody: Lyric-to-melody generation with a template-
based two-stage method,” inProc. of the 2022 Conf. on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates, 2022, pp. 5426–5437.
[17] C. Zhanget al., “ReLyMe: Improving lyric-to-melody generation by
incorporating lyric-melody relationships,”Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, 2022.
[18] D. Zhang, J.-C. Wang, K. Kosta, J. B. Smith, and S. Zhou, “Modeling the
rhythm from lyrics for melody generation of pop song,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.01361, 2023.[19] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess, R. Child,
S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei, “Scaling laws for neural
language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
[20] C. Long, R. C.-W. Wong, and R. K. W. Sze, “T-music: A melody
composer based on frequent pattern mining,” in2013 IEEE 29th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), 2013, pp. 1332–
1335.
[21] M. O. Rabin, “Probabilistic automata,”Information and Control, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 230–245, 1963.
[22] M. Scirea, G. A. B. Barros, N. Shaker, and J. Togelius, “Smug: Scientific
music generator,” inInternational Conference on Innovative Computing
and Cloud Computing, 2015.
[23] C. Ames, “The markov process as a compositional model: A survey and
tutorial,”Leonardo, vol. 22, pp. 175–187, 2017.
[24] S. Fukayama, K. Nakatsuma, S. Sako, T. Nishimoto, and S. Sagayama,
“Automatic song composition from the lyrics exploiting prosody of
japanese language,” in7th Sound and Music Computing Conference,
2010.
[25] C. C. Liao, D. Liao, and J. Guessford, “Automatic time signature
determination for new scores using lyrics for latent rhythmic structure,”
inProc. of the 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. on Big Data (BigData), 2023, pp.
4485–4494.
[26] S. Chowdhury, S. Nag, K. J. Joseph, B. V . Srinivasan, and D. Manocha,
“Melfusion: Synthesizing music from image and language cues using
diffusion models,” in2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 26 816–26 825.
[27] Y . Wang, M. Chen, and X. Li, “Continuous emotion-based image-to-
music generation,”IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 5670–
5679, 2024.
[28] T. Hisariya, H. Zhang, and J. Liang, “Bridging paintings and music
– exploring emotion based music generation through paintings,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07827
[29] G. C. Sergio, R. Mallipeddi, J.-S. Kang, and M. Lee, “Generating music
from an image,” inProceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Human-Agent Interaction, ser. HAI ’15. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2015, p. 213–216. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2814940.2814978
[30] S. Chowdhury, S. Nag, K. J. Joseph, B. V . Srinivasan, and D. Manocha,
“Melfusion: Synthesizing music from image and language cues using
diffusion models,” in2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024, pp. 26 816–26 825.
[31] R. Mitra and I. Zualkernan, “Music generation using deep learning and
generative ai: A systematic review,”IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 18 079–
18 106, 2025.
[32] S. Li, Y . Qin, M. Zheng, X. Jin, and Y . Liu, “ Diff-BGM:
A Diffusion Model for Video Background Music Generation ,”
in2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, Jun. 2024, pp. 27 338–27 347. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.02582
[33] E. L. Zhang, C. C. Liao, and D. Liao, “IMA iGen: A cross-modal image-
to-music generation with a non-deep learning core,” in2025 IEEE MIT
Undergraduate Research Technology Conference (URTC), 2025.
[34] MusicXML. (2024) Musicxml. Accessed: 2025-03-28. [Online].
Available: https://www.musicxml.com/
[35] C. L. Krumhansl and E. J. Kessler, “Tracing the dynamic changes
in perceived tonal organization in a spatial representation of musical
keys,”Psychological Review, vol. 89, no. 4, pp. 334–368, 1982.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.89.4.334
[36] D. Temperley, “What’s key for key? the krumhansl-schmuckler key-
finding algorithm reconsidered,”Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary
Journal, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 65–100, 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40285812
[37] M. Gotham, K. Gullings, C. Hamm, B. Hughes, B. Jarvis,
M. Lavengood, and J. Peterson,Open Music Theory. VIV A’s
Pressbooks, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://viva.pressbooks.pub/
openmusictheory/
[38] MIT. (2010–) MIT Music21. [Online]. Available: https://web.mit.edu/
music21/
[39] M. S. Cuthbert and C. Ariza, “Music21: A toolkit for computer-aided
musicology and symbolic music data.” inISMIR, J. S. Downie and R. C.
Veltkamp, Eds. International Society for Music Information Retrieval,
2010, pp. 637–642.

