--- Page 1 ---
CAN LLMS "REASON" IN MUSIC? AN EVALUATION OF LLMS’
CAPABILITY OF MUSIC UNDERSTANDING AND GENERATION
Ziya Zhou1,2Yuhang Wu2Zhiyue Wu3
Xinyue Zhang2Ruibin Yuan1,2Yinghao Ma2,4
Lu Wang3Emmanouil Benetos4Wei Xue1Yike Guo1
1AIS, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2Multimodal Art Projection
3Shenzhen University
4C4DM, Queen Mary University of London
zzhoucp@connect.ust.hk, weixue@ust.hk, yikeguo@ust.hk
ABSTRACT
Symbolic Music, akin to language, can be encoded in dis-
crete symbols. Recent research has extended the appli-
cation of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4
and Llama2 to the symbolic music domain including un-
derstanding and generation. Yet scant research explores
the details of how these LLMs perform on advanced mu-
sic understanding and conditioned generation, especially
from the multi-step reasoning perspective, which is a crit-
ical aspect in the conditioned, editable, and interactive
human-computer co-creation process. This study conducts
a thorough investigation of LLMs’ capability and limita-
tions in symbolic music processing. We identify that cur-
rent LLMs exhibit poor performance in song-level multi-
step music reasoning, and typically fail to leverage learned
music knowledge when addressing complex musical tasks.
An analysis of LLMs’ responses highlights distinctly their
pros and cons. Our findings suggest achieving advanced
musical capability is not intrinsically obtained by LLMs,
and future research should focus more on bridging the gap
between music knowledge and reasoning, to improve the
co-creation experience for musicians.
1. INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4, harness
the power of deep learning to produce human-like text.
These models, trained on vast datasets of textual content,
have notably propelled advancements in natural language
processing (NLP). They excel in complex language under-
standing and generation tasks including translation, sen-
timent analysis, question answering, and summarization,
showcasing their reasoning capability with sophistication.
Large language models (LLMs), initially pre-trained on
© Z. Zhou, Y . Wu, and Z. Wu. Licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Attribu-
tion: Z. Zhou, Y . Wu, and Z. Wu, “Can LLMs "Reason" in Music?
An Evaluation of LLMs’ Capability of Music Understanding and Gener-
ation”, in Proc. of the 25th Int. Society for Music Information Retrieval
Conf., San Francisco, United States, 2024.extensive textual corpora, can assimilate general linguistic
patterns and structures. They are subsequently fine-tuned
with domain-specific data, such as code and mathemati-
cal symbols, to enhance the adaptation to specific tasks.
This refinement allows LLMs’ proficiency to more accu-
rately manage domain-specific terminology and compli-
cated challenges like multi-step reasoning. Music Reason-
ing refers to the ability to estimate the varying harmonies,
keys, rhythms, and other musical elements that are not ex-
plicitly annotated in a piece of music and are significant
for music themes, progression, and styles [1]. The analogy
between the reasoning process in music and mathemat-
ics suggests their structural similarities. Both disciplines
fundamentally rely on patterns: music in rhythms, scales,
and chord progressions, while mathematics involves se-
quences, symmetries, and geometric configuration. More-
over, music theory utilizes mathematical concepts to artic-
ulate intervals between pitches, chord structures, and the
rhythmic temporal division [2, 3], underscoring the intrin-
sic reasoning nature of the musical components.
Music can be represented as sequences of symbols such
as MIDI or ABC notation, rendering it suitable for process-
ing by LLMs, which excel in long-context understanding
and multi-step reasoning. These models are capable to dis-
sect and generate intricate musical patterns encompassing
melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic structures. LLMs also
play a pivotal role in enhancing interactive music gener-
ation systems, where user inputs tailor the model’s out-
put, enriching the composing experience. While previous
studies [1,4,5] have investigated LLMs in music tasks, de-
tailed interpretations of the process remains less explored.
This paper conduct an evaluation of four LLMs, GPT-
4 [6], Gemma-7B-it [7], Llama2-7B-chat [8], and Qwen-
7B-chat [9], assessing their capabilities on tasks related to
symbolic music understanding and generation:
• Music Understanding: 1) Music theory exercise; 2)
Motif extraction; 3) Musical form extraction.
• Music Generation: 1) Chord-conditioned music gen-
eration; 2) Melody harmonization; 3) Musical-form-
and-motif-conditioned music generationarXiv:2407.21531v1  [cs.SD]  31 Jul 2024

--- Page 2 ---
The task of "Musical Form & Motif Conditioned Mu-
sic Generation" as described in Chatmusician [1] involves
generating music that adheres to detailed prescribed condi-
tions like form and motif. Figure 1 illustrates this process:
The prompt’s green text specifies conditional constraints
including the musical form, motif, and some musical el-
ements (key, time signature, etc.). Under the prompt, the
left sheet presents the human composer’s work. The right
sheets show ABC notations from different models along-
side the reference. The Gemma-7B-it model merely repli-
cates the provided motif, adding no new elements. Simi-
larly, GPT-4 simply repeats the given condition. Qwen-7B-
chat and Llama-7B-chat include correct musical elements
and the motif but fail to capture the musical form "AB" and
maintain the duration of a measure.
The main contributions of our paper are as follows: (1)
we provide multi-step prompt engineering and explore how
LLMs exhibit their reasoning capabilities with multi-step
instructions in music understanding and generation tasks.
(2) we assess four major LLMs on various symbolic music
tasks, analyzing their reasoning in ABC sequences through
quantitative statistical results and qualitative human as-
sessment, including error analysis. The examples, hand-
crafted prompts, and codes of data preprocessing are avail-
able at github.
2. RELATED WORK
In this section, we summarize related works from two per-
spectives. First, we introduce previous studies on LLMs in
the symbolic music domain, explaining their performance
and evaluation methods in music understanding and gen-
eration tasks. Then, we discuss the application of LLMs
in reasoning math problems and controllable creative text
generation, highlighting similarities between the reasoning
processes in music and math and the conditioned, open-
ended nature of both music and text generation.
2.1 LLMs in Symbolic Music Domain
This subsection reviews the application of LLMs in the
symbolic music domain. Previous studies have focused
on adapting LLMs for music understanding and gener-
ation. Chatmusician [1] uses continual pre-training and
fine-tuning on LLaMA2 to understand and generate ABC
notation music, without specialized music structures or
tokenizers. SongComposer [4] collects a song pretrain-
ing dataset including lyrics, melodies and paired lyrics-
melodies, employing 10K crafted QA pairs to enable
LLMs to perform multiple music-related tasks such as
lyric-to-melody conversion and song continuation. Mu-
sicAgent [10] integrates various music tools into a sin-
gle system, though it lacks interaction among these tools.
Most approaches view music creation as a linear process,
which diverges from the multi-step approach humans use,
limiting their applicability for generating creative works.
To mimic human creative processes, ByteComposer [5]
employs a four-step method to replicate the creative work-
flow of human composers: conception analysis, draft Com-position, self-evaluation and modification, and human aes-
thetic selection. And designs an interactive agent system
consisting of expert, generator, voter, and memory mod-
ules. What’s more, they construct supervised fine-tuning
data covering tasks of basic music theory conception, con-
trol code generation, music score evaluation and next-step
planning. Despite being a significant step towards multi-
step music creation with LLMs, it lacks a detailed discus-
sion on the limits of LLMs at each stage.
2.2 Reasoning and Controllable Generation with
LLMs
"Reasoning" in NLP involves integrating various knowl-
edge sources or contexts to generate new assertions,
events, or actions [11]. This process often breaks com-
plex questions into sequential steps [12]. Techniques such
as Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) [13, 14] have shown effec-
tiveness in addressing complex reasoning tasks, particu-
larly in mathematics. The Program-of-Thoughts approach
improves upon CoT by using language models to gener-
ate text and code, enhancing math problem-solving per-
formance [15]. Plan-and-Solve (PS) Prompting, a zero-
shot technique, outperforms zero-shot CoT significantly,
exceeds Zero-shot Program-of-Thoughts, and matches 8-
shot CoT in math reasoning [16].
While music and mathematics share similarities, it is
crucial to recognize that music is not as deterministic. In
controllable music generation, despite given chords, mo-
tifs, and forms, unpredictable elements still significantly
affect the quality of the music, similar to controllable text
generation. Zhang et al. [17], identify three types of con-
trol conditions: semantic, structural, and lexical. Semantic
controls refer to content control such as sentiment [18, 19]
or topic [20, 21], resembling style and emotion in music.
Structural control involves shaping the structure of the gen-
erated text, such as setting a story’s framework or using
data from tables or graphs as input, similar to specifying
musical forms for generation [22, 23]. Lexical controls
manage vocabulary usage, ensuring specific keywords ap-
pear, akin to using musical chords and motifs as guidelines.
LLMs are extensively applied in diverse controllable and
creative generation tasks [24–26]. These systems’ abilities
in long-context and multi-step generation under predefined
conditions are examined, though such analyses are rarely
applied in the music domain.
3. METHODOLOGY
3.1 Datasets
In this paper, we incorporate six tasks covering from mu-
sic understanding to generation. The data is collected
from MusicPile andMusicBench in ChatMusician [1]. The
statistics of the dataset we use are shown in Table 1. Each
model can support the maximum length of tokens of each
task.

--- Page 3 ---
Figure 1 . A comparison of different LLMs’ responses with the same instruction of the musical-form-and-motif-conditioned
task as the input. The ABC notation contained in the response is extracted and displayed as scores the quality of all
responses is marked with diverse symbols.
Tasks Numbers Max/Avg. tokens
Music theory exercise 367 733/103.56
Motif extraction (ME) 2470 1165/194.28
Musical form extraction (MFE) 483 650/187.35
Chord-conditioned generation (CCG) 1721 283/94.83
Melody harmonization (MH) 355 551/166.03
Musical-form-and-motif-conditioned generation (MFMC) 4881 285/53.82
Table 1 . Statistics of each task. The number of items and the max and average length of tokens are provided.
3.2 Prompt Engineering
Before examining each LLM’s task performance, we con-
ducted preliminary tests to verify their understanding of
the relevant musical concepts. These tests confirmed that
all models possess foundational knowledge of the six mu-
sic tasks assessed in this study.
We employed two prompt modes in our experiments
of all tasks, Default andChain-of-Thoughts (CoT) . De-
fault mode means forcing the model to respond without
any analysis. Additionally, for music theory exercises, to
make the model better understand the questions and op-
tions, and return the answer in a unified format, we also
include the In-Context-Learning (ICL) mode by adding
some question-answer pairs as examples shown to the
models in the prompt. Taking the task of music theory
exercises understanding as an example, three modes of
prompts as the prefix of inputs followed by each item in
the datasets are shown in Figure 2. Different from the mu-
sic theory exercise, we specifically design prompts to sup-
port a multi-round chat conversation with LLMs for the
generation tasks. Figure 3 shows an example of a four-
round prompt set of chord-conditioned generation. We in-
vite graduates who majored in music composition to write
down their multi-step thoughts when completing the gener-
ation tasks involved in this paper. We summarize the com-
mon steps of all answers, adapt them to the prompt set, and
make sure LLMs can understand or at least intend to fol-
low the instructions. An example of GPT-4’s response to
the instruction in Figure 3 is shown on the website1.
1https://github.com/SylviaZiyaZhou/LLMs_music_reasoning/blob/main/
CoT_music_generation_GPT4_response.pdf
Default :"You willseeJSON -formatted instruction data followed by
questions .Your responses should only indicate theselected option
(using uppercase letters), without providing anyanalysis ."
CoT :"You willseeaJSON -formatted instruction data followed by
questions .Your responses should include ananalysis step bystep.
The returned JSON format isasfollows :{"reason" :"Let’s think
step bystep ","answer" :"A"} "
ICL:CoT +"Here isanexample ofaquestion anditsanswer :
Read thefollowing questions from thefour options (A,B,CandD)
given ineach question .Choose the best option .Which ofthe
following isthename ofthenote intheexample?",
"L:1/4M:4/4K:Cb,D,4|]",
Options :{"A":"B-flat", "B":"D", "C":"B","D":"D-flat"},
Answer :"D".Music Theory ExerciseFigure 2 . A prompt example of the music theory exercise
in different modes.
3.3 Pre-processing Responses
The responses of models are supposed to have correct ABC
notations, but it may have certain syntax or formatting is-
sues, and some outputs may even contain a large amount of
natural language. We select the main features of ABC no-
tation including field names and bar line symbols to help
us extract the ABC sequence. If the extracted ABC se-
quence can be rendered into MIDI files using Music212
successfully and can be later rendering into audio file using
midi2audio3, we consider it capable of producing valid
ABC notation.
2https://web.mit.edu/music21
3https://pypi.org/project/midi2audio

--- Page 4 ---
Default :"Formulate acaptivating melody that blend with thegiven
chord progression .The piece should berepresented correctly inABC
notation format .
'Bb', 'F','Gm', 'Dm', 'Eb', 'Bb', 'Eb', 'F','Bb', 'Gm', 'Cm', 'D','Gm', 'Cm',
'Gm', 'D7','Gm', 'Eb', 'F','Gm', 'F','Bb', 'F','Cm', 'F','Gm' "
CoT (multi -round) :
Round 1:"Separate thefollowing chord progression into several
segments .
'Bb', 'F','Gm', 'Dm', 'Eb', 'Bb', 'Eb', 'F','Bb', 'Gm', 'Cm', 'D','Gm', 'Cm',
'Gm', 'D7','Gm', 'Eb', 'F','Gm', 'F','Bb', 'F','Cm', 'F','Gm' "
Round 2:"Creating themelody foreach segment respectively and
integrate melodies and chords into acomplete one based onyour
knowledge .Remember toconsider thebass note ofeach chord .The
composition should berepresented correctly inABC notation format .
Round 3:"Revise your composition .Please make sure thekeyand
tempo isconsistent and contain more complex rhythms (e.g.dotted
notes) andvarious chords ."
Round 4:"Continue toelaborate your composition .Please improve
theoverall structure ofthecomposition ."Chord -conditioned GenerationFigure 3 . A prompt example of the chord-conditioned
generation in different modes.
3.4 Multi-step Reasoning Analysis
In order to compare each model’s reasoning capability on
both understanding and generation tasks, we first conduct
a subjective assessment to evaluate how different models’
reasoning processes influence their performances. Partici-
pants are all familiar with basic music theory and can un-
derstand each task as well as the ABC notation. Secondly,
based on the results of the subjective assessment, we fur-
ther perform an error analysis in detail to show the interme-
diate answers during the reasoning process of each model.
3.4.1 Human Assessment Pipeline
In this section, we will provide a detailed description of our
subjective experiments on four popular and open-source
LLMs, including Gemma-7B-it, Llama2-7B-Chat, GPT-4,
and Qwen-7B-chat. We ask the participants to evaluate
to what extent the model understands the instructions and
correctly answer the questions in the understanding tasks,
and to what extent the responses contain the conditions and
make creative works in the generation tasks. Specifically,
the questions in the human assessment are as follows:
• For both understanding and generation tasks: 1) To
what extent does the model understand and follow
the instructions?
• Specifically for the understanding tasks: 1) To what
extent does the model correctly answer the question?
2) To what extent does the model reason like human
beings?
• Specifically for the generation tasks: 1) AB test:
please choose the better one between a pair of mu-
sic excerpts by considering their "Musicality"; 2) To
what extent does the model contain the conditions?Except for the AB test in the generation task, each ques-
tion should be rated in a scoring range from 0 to 10 points.
We invited music experts who are familiar with ABC nota-
tions as the participants in the human assessment, ensuring
that each item was evaluated by at least two experts.
4. EVALUATION RESULTS
In this section, we provide the evaluation results based on
the methodology we discussed in the last section. The
quantitative results include the correctly parsing rate of
ABC notation in the generation tasks, and the accuracy of
music theory exercises. The qualitative results include the
statistical analysis of human assessment and the detailed
error analysis. Due to space limitation, we provide the ex-
amples at github and the online links of the corresponding
files will be attached in the illustration.
4.1 Quantitative Results
Figure 4 shows the success rate of rendering valid au-
dio from each LLM’s responses under different generation
tasks. The pre-processing methodology is introduced in
Section 3.3. Except for GPT-4, the other three models all
have an audio generation rate of less than 50%, finding it
difficult to generate the correct ABC notation format to be
converted into audio.
Table 2 displays the accuracy of the music theory exer-
cises in three modes. The reason why some models have
an accuracy rate below 25% in multiple-choice questions
with four options is that most of their responses seek addi-
tional information about the questions rather than answer-
ing them. Gemma-7B-it has a comparable performance
with GPT-4 in the Reason. subset in the Default mode
even with a much smaller model size. However, CoT and
ICL modes, which significantly improve the GPT-4’s per-
formance, show very limited effect or even deficiency in
other models. This may inspire us to reconsider the uti-
lization of classical CoT and ICL approaches in solving
music tasks.
Figure 4 . The success rate of rendering audio from each
LLM’s responses in the music generation tasks.

--- Page 5 ---
Model (and Mode) Know. (%) Reas. (%)
GPT-4 (Default) 58.2 25.6
GPT-4 (CoT) 68.4 36.7
GPT-4 (ICL) 69.9 34.9
Llama2-7B-chat (Default) 11.9 10.2
Llama2-7B-chat (CoT) 29.8 16.3
Llama2-7B-chat (ICL) 10.4 15.3
Gemma-7B-it (Default) 45.7 31.6
Gemma-7B-it (CoT) 36.1 17.3
Gemma-7B-it (ICL) 33.1 31.6
Qwen-7B-chat (Default) 42.0 17.4
Qwen-7B-chat (CoT) 40.2 22.4
Qwen-7B-chat (ICL) 35.7 24.5
Table 2 . Accuracy of the music theory exercises of each
model. All three modes of results are provided. Know.
means the music knowledge part and Reas. means the
music reasoning part. They are two subsets of which the
former tests the models’ memory of basic music concepts
and the latter needs further reasoning and calculation to be
completed. GPT-4’s results come from [1].
Type ModelInst. Fl. Correct. Reason.
µ σ µ σ µ σ
MEGPT-4 10.0 0.0 6.5 2.6 7.8 1.3
Gemma 8.2 2.1 5.1 2.8 7.4 3.2
Llama2 7.8 1.9 4.7 2.8 4.7 2.4
Qwen 7.6 0.7 3.8 1.5 2.1 1.3
MFEGPT-4 10.0 0.0 5.0 2.5 5.6 2.0
Gemma 3.5 3.6 2.1 2.2 2.9 2.1
Llama2 5.4 1.8 3.2 2.8 4.3 2.3
Qwen 2.6 1.5 2.3 1.9 3.3 2.0
Table 3 . The human assessment results of different LLMs
on the understanding task. Inst. Fl. ,Correct. andRea-
son. respectively indicate to what extent the model follows
the instructions, correctly answers the questions, and rea-
sons like humans. µandσrespectively denote the average
scores and the standard variance.
Type ModelInst. Fl. Condi.
µ σ µ σ
MFMCGPT-4 5.7 1.4 6.3 1.5
Gemma 4.0 1.8 4.6 2.2
Llama2 4.3 1.6 4.3 2.3
Qwen 4.9 2.1 2.9 2.2
MHGPT-4 6.5 3.5 5.5 2.5
Gemma 3.0 1.0 4.5 2.5
CCGGPT-4 5.2 3.3 5.8 3.8
Gemma 1.6 1.0 1.3 0.8
Table 4 . The human assessment results of different LLMs
on the generation task. Condi. indicates to what extent the
model contains the condition given in the instructions and
ABC format.4.2 Qualitative Results
For human assessment, Table 3 shows LLMs on ME and
MFE tasks under the CoT mode. We randomly sampled 40
examples of each task. In the instruction following ques-
tion, GPT-4 demonstrates very good results, while other
LLMs more or less can accomplish the tasks, indicating
a certain level of capability. However, when it comes to
the correctness, even GPT-4 finds it challenging to provide
satisfactory answers to the prompts. When testing the log-
ical reasoning of LLMs, the average scores indicate that all
LLMs encounter difficulties in applying logical reasoning
when answering questions step by step, leading to funda-
mental errors in music theory or illogical conclusions. This
highlights the LLMs’ limitation of involving music back-
ground knowledge.
Table 4 presents the results of human assessment we
conducted on generative tasks. In addition to the results
shown in the table, we also conducted an AB test based
on Musicality. We find that the GPT-4 and Gemma-7B-
it achieve comparable results in MFMCG task, while in
other tasks GPT-4 always wins. This means Gemma-7B-
it has a potential in creating high-quality symbolic music
with limited model size.
As depicted in Figure 4, on MH and CCG tasks, Qwen-
7B-chat and Llama2-7B-chat struggled to effectively out-
put correct ABC sequences to be rendered into audios.
Therefore, for MH and CCG tasks, we only include the AB
test results for GPT-4 and Gemma-7B-it. Despite GPT-4
achieving relatively better scores in generative tasks, it still
falls far away from humans’ expectations. Interestingly,
beyond the data, LLMs’ generative results occasionally ex-
hibit instances of copying motifs provided in the prompt,
as well as displaying unstructured harmonic repetitions or
completely off-key notes. We believe that although LLMs
can adhere to the ABC format condition provided in the
prompt, their lack of musical information and knowledge
makes it challenging to understand the high-level informa-
tion within the condition, resulting in less satisfactory gen-
erated outcomes.
In terms of the results from subjective experiments, we
identified a common issue prevalent in LLMs. Firstly,
LLMs, apart from GPT-4, struggle to generate data in the
correct ABC format with high probability, despite being
able to provide a perfect answer when asked what ABC no-
tation is. This phenomenon led us to speculate that while
LLMs are trained extensively and comprehensively, LLMs
can hardly understand all the information they have been
exposed to and utilize them in different scenarios. Be-
sides, LLMs can generate music in a seemingly appropri-
ate ABC format in generative tasks, but what appears to
be a correctly-formatted response is merely copying the
prompt without grasping the semantic and structural infor-
mation in the given condition.
4.2.1 Multi-step Reasoning Analysis
To better illustrate each model’s reasoning capability when
it is used to complete the music theory exercises, we pro-
vide an example of a question in the music theory exer-

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 5 . Human composer’s work for the chord-
conditioned generation task.
cises subset and step-by-step responses of the four mod-
els4. The question is about recognizing the interval prop-
erty of an ABC sequence referring to a compound in a mu-
sic sheet. From the responses, we can see that GPT-4 is
the only model which can actually perform the calculation
but still unable to understand the musical notes in the ABC
notation. In the GPT-4’s responses in the CoT mode, "4",
which is mistaken as "a fourth apart", should be a note
duration. Accordingly, this mistake influences the whole
reasoning process of the calculation of intervals. The re-
sponse of Llama2-7B-chat also shows its incapability of
involving correct music knowledge understanding of notes
intervals in the reasoning process. What’s more, Qwen-
7B-chat even accidentally contains Chinese in the English
text and Gemma-7B-it failed to recognize musical notes in
the ABC sequence (see in the supplementary materials), al-
though they can return the correct answer if they are merely
asked about "the definition of note intervals".
Besides, the responses of generation tasks such as
MFMC generation also have similar problems. In the CoT
mode, we find all LLMs except GPT-4, are hard to follow
the multi-step instructions and output music in a correct
ABC format, so we only provide a GPT-4 response respec-
tively in the raw text5and music sheet6form given the
prompt in Figure 3. Although GPT-4 can well understand
the instructions in every step, it generates repetitive and
simple rhythm without enough progression and variation,
compared to the human composer’s work in Figure 5.
5. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In conclusion, our experimental analysis highlights current
LLMs’ limitations in the realm of music understanding and
generation, particularly from the perspective of song-level
multi-step reasoning. These findings are crucial as they un-
derline the challenges LLMs face when tasked with gener-
ating coherent and contextually rich musical compositions,
4https://github.com/SylviaZiyaZhou/LLMs_music_reasoning/blob/
main/CoT_music_theory_exercise_all_LLMs.pdf
5https://github.com/SylviaZiyaZhou/LLMs_music_reasoning/blob
/main/CoT_music_generation_GPT4_response.pdf
6https://github.com/SylviaZiyaZhou/LLMs_music_reasoning/blob
/main/Music_Sheet_of_music_generation_GPT4_response.pdfwhich often require both complex sequential processing
and creative fineness. From the human assessment results
and the error analysis, we find that all these models failed
to inject correct music theory and knowledge in the mu-
sic understanding, reasoning and generation process. This
knowledge generalization gap is analogous to the reversal
curse problem illustrated in [27] where LLMs trained on
“A is B” fail to learn “B is A”. Without making sure the
fundamental concepts are correctly mentioned in the gen-
erated responses, it is hard to alleviate the LLMs’ hallu-
cination and guarantee the responses’ quality. Therefore,
it is significant to implement the knowledge augmentation
module in the Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) stage to en-
sure the LLMs can reason based on correct music knowl-
edge by curating more SFT data with enough knowledge-
based contexts and practical reasoning processes.
Specifically, several insights for the multi-step SFT
dataset construction can be concluded from the process
where professional musicians are asked to create music
following the instructions. Firstly, more expert knowledge
should be involved in the dataset construction to guarantee
its quality. For example, in the chord-conditioned genera-
tion task in Chatmusician’s dataset, the bass note sequence
of the given chords does not conform to the musicians’
expectation of the progression generally. Secondly, some
conditions in the old one-step form are too lengthy and in-
formative with limitations that the human composers feel
difficult to follow. For example, when they are given an
"AB" structure with two different motives in the MFMC
task, all of them find hard to integrate two segments with
different motives into a complete piece of music in an
"AB" form. Therefore, it might not be reasonable to ask
the LLMs to output a completely and well composed mu-
sic in a one-step approach.
What’s more, although four models are all claimed to be
able to handle the input size from 4Kto8Ktokens, which
is much longer than the instructions in the dataset we used,
they do not show their long-context processing advantages
in the symbolic music domain. Our experimental results
show that the widely-used CoT and ICL approaches are not
always effective in improving the model’s performance. In
this way, more step-by-step learning strategies should be
specifically developed for instruction-based symbolic mu-
sic tasks by focusing on correctly answering music the-
ory exercises, explicitly extracting motifs and implicitly
extracting musical forms, and consistently following the
conditions in the instructions.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research was supported by Early Career Scheme
(ECS-HKUST22201322), Theme-based Research Scheme
(T45-205/21-N) from Hong Kong RGC, NSFC (No.
62206234), and Generative AI Research and Development
Centre from InnoHK. Yinghao Ma is a research student at
the UKRI Centre for Doctoral Training in Artificial Intelli-
gence and Music, supported by UK Research and Innova-
tion [grant number EP/S022694/1].
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Jia

--- Page 7 ---
Ding and Xiaoduan Li, professional musicians who ma-
jored in music composition at Central Conservatory of
Music, for their valuable contributions and suggestions
throughout the multi-step prompt engineering in condi-
tioned generation tasks.
7. REFERENCES
[1] R. Yuan, H. Lin, Y . Wang, Z. Tian, S. Wu, T. Shen,
G. Zhang, Y . Wu, C. Liu, Z. Zhou, Z. Ma, L. Xue,
Z. Wang, Q. Liu, T. Zheng, Y . Li, Y . Ma, Y . Liang,
X. Chi, R. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Li, J. Wu, C. Lin,
Q. Liu, T. Jiang, W. Huang, W. Chen, E. Benetos,
J. Fu, G. Xia, R. Dannenberg, W. Xue, S. Kang,
and Y . Guo, “ChatMusician: Understanding and
Generating Music Intrinsically with LLM,” Feb. 2024,
arXiv:2402.16153 [cs, eess]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16153
[2] T. H. Garland and C. V . Kahn, Math and Music: Har-
monious Connections. ERIC, 1995.
[3] D. Wright, Mathematics and music . American Math-
ematical Soc., 2009, vol. 28.
[4] S. Ding, Z. Liu, X. Dong, P. Zhang, R. Qian, C. He,
D. Lin, and J. Wang, “Songcomposer: A large lan-
guage model for lyric and melody composition in song
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17645 , 2024.
[5] X. Liang, X. Du, J. Lin, P. Zou, Y . Wan, and B. Zhu,
“ByteComposer: a Human-like Melody Composition
Method based on Language Model Agent,” Mar. 2024,
arXiv:2402.17785 [cs, eess]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17785
[6] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya,
F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Alt-
man, S. Anadkat et al. , “Gpt-4 technical report,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023.
[7] G. Team, T. Mesnard, C. Hardin, R. Dadashi, S. Bhu-
patiraju, S. Pathak, L. Sifre, M. Rivière, M. S.
Kale, J. Love et al. , “Gemma: Open models based
on gemini research and technology,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.08295 , 2024.
[8] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Alma-
hairi, Y . Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava,
S. Bhosale et al. , “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 ,
2023.
[9] J. Bai, S. Bai, Y . Chu, Z. Cui, K. Dang, X. Deng,
Y . Fan, W. Ge, Y . Han, F. Huang et al. , “Qwen tech-
nical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 , 2023.
[10] D. Yu, K. Song, P. Lu, T. He, X. Tan, W. Ye, S. Zhang,
and J. Bian, “Musicagent: An ai agent for music under-
standing and generation with large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11954 , 2023.[11] F. Yu, H. Zhang, and B. Wang, “Nature language rea-
soning, a survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14725 ,
2023.
[12] S. Hao, Y . Gu, H. Ma, J. J. Hong, Z. Wang,
D. Z. Wang, and Z. Hu, “Reasoning with language
model is planning with world model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14992 , 2023.
[13] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia,
E. Chi, Q. V . Le, D. Zhou et al. , “Chain-of-thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,”
Advances in neural information processing systems ,
vol. 35, pp. 24 824–24 837, 2022.
[14] T. Kojima, S. S. Gu, M. Reid, Y . Matsuo, and Y . Iwa-
sawa, “Large language models are zero-shot reason-
ers,” Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, vol. 35, pp. 22 199–22 213, 2022.
[15] W. Chen, X. Ma, X. Wang, and W. W. Cohen, “Pro-
gram of thoughts prompting: Disentangling compu-
tation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12588 , 2022.
[16] L. Wang, W. Xu, Y . Lan, Z. Hu, Y . Lan, R. K.-W.
Lee, and E.-P. Lim, “Plan-and-solve prompting: Im-
proving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04091 ,
2023.
[17] H. Zhang, H. Song, S. Li, M. Zhou, and D. Song,
“A survey of controllable text generation using
transformer-based pre-trained language models,” ACM
Computing Surveys , vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1–37, 2023.
[18] H. Chen, X. Yi, M. Sun, W. Li, C. Yang, and Z. Guo,
“Sentiment-controllable chinese poetry generation.” in
IJCAI , 2019, pp. 4925–4931.
[19] S. Dathathri, A. Madotto, J. Lan, J. Hung, E. Frank,
P. Molino, J. Yosinski, and R. Liu, “Plug and play lan-
guage models: A simple approach to controlled text
generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02164 , 2019.
[20] M. Khalifa, H. Elsahar, and M. Dymetman, “A distri-
butional approach to controlled text generation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.11635 , 2020.
[21] H. Tang, M. Li, and B. Jin, “A topic augmented text
generation model: Joint learning of semantics and
structural features,” in Proceedings of the 2019 con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing and the 9th international joint conference on
natural language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 2019,
pp. 5090–5099.
[22] R. Puduppully, L. Dong, and M. Lapata, “Data-to-
text generation with content selection and planning,”
inProceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial in-
telligence , vol. 33, no. 01, 2019, pp. 6908–6915.

--- Page 8 ---
[23] L. F. Ribeiro, M. Schmitt, H. Schütze, and I. Gurevych,
“Investigating pretrained language models for graph-
to-text generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08426 ,
2020.
[24] N. Simon and C. Muise, “Tattletale: storytelling with
planning and large language models,” in ICAPS Work-
shop on Scheduling and Planning Applications , 2022.
[25] K. Xie and M. Riedl, “Creating suspenseful stories:
Iterative planning with large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.17119 , 2024.
[26] Z. Zhang, M. Rayhan, T. Herda, M. Goisauf, and
P. Abrahamsson, “Llm-based agents for automating the
enhancement of user story quality: An early report,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09442 , 2024.
[27] L. Berglund, M. Tong, M. Kaufmann, M. Balesni,
A. C. Stickland, T. Korbak, and O. Evans, “The rever-
sal curse: Llms trained on "a is b" fail to learn "b is a",”
2024.

